## CHAPTER IV
## The Dialectic of Consciousness
 

 

1
The PhG, written at the end of the Jena period (1806-7), can be thought of a kind of introduction to Hegel’s system, whose function would be to take the reader from where he is, buried in the prejudices of ordinary consciousness, to the threshold of true science. But this cannot be the whole story. The very nature of Hegel’s system of thought is that it shows all partial reality to be dependent on an absolute which in turn necessarily generates this partial reality. From this point of view, there is no reality, however humble and fragmentary, which can be thought to fall outside the system, and no transition between levels of reality whose explicitation could be considered a kind of hors d’oeuvre.

And this applies a fortiori to modes of consciousness, in a system where the absolute is spirit. Spirit comes to know himself, and the vehicles of this self-knowledge are finite spirits. The course of Geist’s development towards self-knowledge lies through the initial confusions, misconceptions and truncated visions of men. These cannot therefore lie outside the system. Rather this initial darkness reflects something essential about the absolute, viz., that it must grow through struggle to self-knowledge. Hence there cannot easily be an introduction to the science of the absolute which is not also part of that science, no mere clearing of the ground which is not also a partial construction of the building.

This goes some way to explaining why there has been so much debate and uncertainty over the status of the PhG. Hegel seems to have thought of it as leading in to the Logic, and in this sense as introductory. But at the same time he described the work on the title page as the ‘first part’ of a ‘System of Science’. This was to include the Logic and what later was developed into the philosophies of nature and spirit, first variants of which he had already worked out at Jena. When he came to give these their final form, certain of the things treated in the PhG are once more taken up in the philosophy of spirit; and inevitably so, since an account of the development of spirit cannot avoid dealing with forms of consciousness. And to increase the confusion, there is a section of the part of the Encyclopaedia devoted to subjective spirit which is called ‘Phenomenology’.

But this need confuse us only if we think of the Hegelian system as a perfectly tidy one with a necessary order in which everything falls into place. Hegel rather encouraged this by his presentation of Logic and philosophies of nature and spirit in a great triad as an Encyclopaedia of science. There is indeed some point in presenting these as a triad, but it is not the exclusive order consistent with his philosophical position. The point is, rather, as we described it in the last chapter, that one should be able to start anywhere, and recuperate one’s original starting point. There are different ways of laying out the system of necessary connection depending on where one starts.

The PhG intends to start with our ordinary consciousness of things (das naturliches Bewußtsein), and to take us from there to the true perspective of Geist. The work is called a ‘phenomenology’ because it deals with the way things appear for consciousness, or with forms of consciousness. But ‘appearance’ here is not to be contrasted with ‘reality’; what is most real, the absolute, is essentially self-appearance. Phenomenology is not a science of lesser things, which can be left behind, but one way of acceding to absolute knowledge, of making the absolute ‘apparent’.

Our ordinary consciousness takes us to be individual, finite subjects set over against the world. The perspective of Geist, on the other hand, shows us as vehicles of a spirit which is also expressed in the world, so that this world is no longer distinct from us. But how can we induce ordinary consciousness to budge from its perspective and take on the higher one? Just affirming (versichern) our position will do no good, for there is no reason for the plain man to believe us. In fact no argument which is based on a knowledge of the absolute denied to ordinary consciousness will do any good, for it will ipso facto be inaccessible as argument to this consciousness.

The kind of argument Hegel proposes to use here is something quite different. It is a form implicit in his system: it is to show how ordinary consciousness carefully examined breaks down in contradiction and itself points beyond itself to a more adequate form. And of course only an argument of this form would be consistent with Hegel’s conclusion. If ordinary consciousness had to be shown the way to absolute knowledge from the outside, had to be taught by being given information or insight it could not acquire itself, then it would not be part of that ascending series of modes of understanding which constitute Geist’s knowledge of himself; it would be outside the Absolute.

In this vein, Hegel starts off the introduction to PhG attacking those who begin with a critique of our faculty of knowledge as a tool we use to get at reality or a medium through which reality appears to us. It is not just that this makes the problem of knowledge insoluble, since ex hypothesi we cannot get at reality as it is in itself, untouched by our tool, or unreflected in our medium. It is also that this approach assumes that the absolute, what is to be known, is something which is quite distinct from our knowledge of it, that ‘the absolute stands on one side and that knowledge, though it is on the other side, for itself and separated from the absolute, is nevertheless something real’ (PhG, 65).1 This, Hegel points out, is to prejudge the issue; something he is the less willing to do in this case since he wants to come to a conclusion diametrically opposed to this common assumption.

The method then is to start in ordinary consciousness, not import anything from outside, and make an ‘immanent critique’, as this procedure has come to be known in the Hegelian and Marxist tradition. This means that we must follow the dialectical movement in consciousness.

It is important to stress here that Hegel is not proposing the use of a dialectical ‘method’ or ‘approach’. If we want to characterize his method we might just as well speak of it as ‘descriptive’, following Kenley Dove.2 For his aim is simply to follow the movement in his object of study. The task of the philosopher is ‘to submerge his freedom in [the content], and let it be moved by its own nature’ (48). If the argument follows a dialectical movement, then this must be in the things themselves, not just in the way we reason about them.

Now we saw in the last chapter that there is a dialectical movement in things because they are riven with contradiction. Every partial reality is posited by the whole or absolute as a necessary condition of this absolute’s existence; for this absolute can only be as embodied in a world of external, physical things and finite spirits. And yet these partial realities, just because they exist externally, each alongside the others, make a standing claim to independence which belies their status as posited vehicles of the whole.

We speak of ‘contradiction’ in this context because we can give a sense to the language of claim and denial when talking about things. But we can give a sense to this language because we see things not as just there, but as posited in order to embody and express Geist. In other words it is the ultimate ontological status of the category of purpose, and expressive purpose, which gives a sense to the theory of ontological contradiction. The whole furniture of the world is there in order to embody Geist and to manifest what he essentially is, self-knowing spirit, self-thinking thought, pure rational necessity.

But the inescapable medium of expression of this thought is external reality, and this cannot carry the message integrally. It is bound to distort it, just because this reality is external, its parts are independent of each other, and are subject to contingency. That is why external reality does not express the thought of rational necessity through some stable concatenation of enduring things, but rather through the process in which things come to be and pass away. Pass away they must, because they contradict the very basis of their existence, which is to express rational necessity; but in thus cancelling what it has posited spirit comes after all to say what it wanted. What could not be expressed in external existence is expressed in the movement by which these existents come to be and pass away. The ‘distortion’ which external reality imposed on spirit’s message is corrected by its necessary demise. Spirit never comes to one unchanging expression which says it all, but in the play of affirmation and denial it manifests what it is.

Hence, it is ultimately because we see reality on Hegel’s theory as posited in order to say or manifest something, that we can speak of certain of its pervasive and inescapable features – such as existence partes extra partes – as ‘distortions’, as saying something different from what they are meant to say, and hence as ‘contradicting’.

But this insight will not help us in an ascending dialectic such as the one we are now about to embark on. For we agreed that ordinary consciousness was not to be lectured at from outside; rather we were to start with ordinary consciousness and follow its own movement. Instead of showing how all partial realities must be contradictory once we accept the world as embodiment/expression of Geist, we have to start by pointing out the contradiction in finite existents and move from there to show how this contradiction can only be made sense of if we see these finite things as part of the embodiment of Geist. And as we saw in the previous chapter, an ascending dialectic of this kind is essential to Hegel’s position, not just because he wants to convince people, but because the rational vision of Geist is supposed to be a seamless tissue of rational argument. It is not enough to show that Geist requires finite existents; we also have to show that these require Geist. Examined closely, they have to show their dependence on the whole. Otherwise Hegel’s conception, which is also Geist’s knowledge of himself, is just another vision based on faith, or on over-all plausibility; and this is unacceptable if Geist is Reason.

But how can we discover contradiction in finite things? Taken just by themselves, as ordinary consciousness sees them, material objects or finite spirits are just given. We just saw that to see them as in contradiction we have to look on them as posited. But this is just what we are not allowed to do at the beginning without begging the question and violating our method. We seem caught in a vicious circle. How do we get started?

Hegel’s claim will be that whatever reality we consider, no matter how circumscribed and seemingly independent, will manifest the inner articulation necessary for contradiction. This inner articulation, as we saw in the last chapter, is one where we can distinguish what the thing concerned is aiming at or is meant to be, on one hand, and what it effectively is on the other. Once this is so, then there can be a clash between effective existence and the goal or standard aimed at, and hence the thing is liable to contradiction. Thus the goal we discern does not have to be that of expressing Geist in the first instance. We can start off with a lesser standard, and by showing how effective existence cannot meet this standard, manifest a contradiction.

This is how Hegel accounts for dialectical contradiction in the PhG. We start off with something which is intrinsically characterized by the purpose it is bent on realizing or the standard it must meet. We then show of this thing that it cannot effectively fulfil this purpose or meet the standard (and the ‘cannot’ here is one of conceptual necessity). We are up against a contradiction.

This can take two forms. It can be that the purpose is in fact unrealized in the thing as it is; and in this case the existing reality will necessarily go under or be transformed as the purpose in further pursuing itself cancels its inadequate fulfilment. Or it can be that the standard is already met. And then the contradiction will force us to change our conception of the standard or purpose, or our conception of the reality in which it is fulfilled, in order to give a coherent account of this fulfilment.

And we in fact find dialectics of these two sorts in Hegel. His historical dialectics are of the first form: certain historical forms of life are prey to inner contradiction, either because they are doomed to frustrate the very purpose for which they exist (e.g., the master–slave relation), or because they are bound to generate an inner conflict between different conditions which are equally essential to the fulfilment of the purpose (as with the Greek polis, whose fate Hegel will discuss in chapter VI). These forms are thus destined to go under and be replaced by others.

But Hegel also presents dialectics of the other kind, which we can call ‘ontological’. We have an example in the opening section of the PhG and also in the Logic. Here we are not dealing with historical change, or at least not primarily. Rather we are deepening our conception of a given standard and of the reality which meets it. And essential to the dialectical argument is the notion that the standard is already met. It is because we know this that we know that any conception of the purpose or standard which shows it as unrealizable must be a faulty conception; and it is this which takes us from stage to stage of the dialectic.

This distinction only concerns the basis from which a dialectical argument starts. It has nothing to do with the kind of contradictions it deals with. Thus it would be very wrong to see the distinction as one between dialectics which deal with contradictions in reality, and dialectics which deal with contradictions in our conceptions of reality. For in Hegel’s most important ontological dialectic, the Logic, we shall see that the contradictory conceptions whose dialectical movement we follow really apply. They correspond to contradictory realities, which as such show their dependence on a larger whole which the higher categories describe. In other words the contradictions in our conceptions of reality will not be overcome by resolving them into a vision free of contradiction, but rather by seeing that they reflect contradictions in reality which are reconciled in a larger synthesis.

Similarly, the dialectic of consciousness in the PhG will take us through a critique of inadequate conceptions of knowledge considered as a realized standard. But at the same time, all the definitions we examine, even the most inadequate, have been held by men to be true at one time or other (including the present in the case of some men). They have thus necessarily shaped practice. And this means that the perfection of knowledge, where knowledge of the world comes together with self-knowledge, has not always been realized. The practice of knowledge, unlike that of playing hockey, say, cannot be divorced from our conception of it. Knowledge is ipso facto imperfect if it is in error about its own nature. Hence perfect knowledge can only be attained when men reach an adequate conception of it.3

Thus the dialectic of theories of knowledge is connected to a dialectic of historical forms of consciousness.

Reciprocally, while historical dialectics deal with the contradiction between certain historical forms and the basic purposes sought in them, this is also bound up with a contradiction in men’s ideas. Indeed, the way men conceive the basic purposes of mankind is essential to the characterization of any given historical form and its inadequacy. That men at the beginning of history are incapable of realizing man’s potential is bound up with their inability to conceive the goals of man (and Geist) adequately.

And it is because the conception of men’s basic purposes that goes with a given historical life form is inadequate, that men at this stage are bound to defeat these purposes. This inadequate conception is thus essential to the contradiction; for the contradiction comes not from the fact that men’s purposes go awry, but that men defeat them in trying to fulfill them. So that the contradiction in any historical society or civilization can be said to consist in this, that men’s basic purposes, conceived in the terms of this society, are doomed to be self-defeating. Thus the play of changing conceptions is as essential to historical dialectics as the change of historical reality, and indeed, the one is bound up with the other.

We can see from this how closely related the two kinds of dialectic are in Hegel’s work. Each figures in the explanation of the other. Hegel’s philosophy of history refers us to his ontology; and his ontology requires historical development.

I spoke above of dialectical movement as generated by a clash between a purpose or standard and its attempted fulfilment. But we can see from the above that we might better understand it as a relation involving not just two terms but three: the basic purpose or standard, the inadequate reality, and an inadequate conception of the purpose which is bound up with that reality. This is clear in the case of the historical dialectics. There is a purpose which is frustrated by the inadequate conception of it which arises inescapably out of a certain historical form of life.

But the ontological dialectics also involve three terms. We start off with an inadequate notion of the standard involved. But we also have from the beginning some very basic, correct notions of what the standard or purpose is, some criterial properties which it must meet. It is these criterial properties which in fact enable us to show that a given conception of the standard is inadequate. For we show that this conception cannot be realized in such a way as to meet the criterial properties, and hence that this definition is unacceptable as a definition of the standard or purpose concerned. But we show the inadequacy of the faulty formula by trying to ‘realize’ it, that is, construct a reality according to it. This is what brings out the conflict with the standard. So that reality is our third term.

We can illustrate this point, and at the same time show why Hegel calls this kind of argument ‘dialectical’, by glancing back at Plato. For Plato’s argument can sometimes be understood on this model, that is, as the discovery of contradiction in formulae which are put forward as definitions of a certain idea or standard, which formulae are then set aside for more adequate ones.

Thus in Republic I, when Cephalos puts forward a definition of justice as telling the truth and giving back what one owes, Socrates refutes it with an example, that of a man whose arms one is keeping, and who asks for them back in a state of madness. This example is enough to set aside Cephalos’ definition. This is because the formula ‘tell the truth and pay your debts’ is put forward as a definition of justice. Now we do not yet know the true definition of justice at this stage of the dialogue. But we do know some of its criterial properties. We know for instance that a just act is a good act, one which should be done. When we have shown therefore an act which conforms to the above formula, but which should not be done, as manifestly one should not return his arms to a madman, one makes it untenable as a definition of justice; for to go on maintaining it would involve one in the contradiction of saying that the act was both just and wrong.

What Socrates has done is to show what it would be like to fulfil the standard as defined in Cephalos’ formula, that is, what it would be like to act on it across the board. And he shows from this example that Cephalos’ principle can’t be fulfilled compatibly with the criterial properties of justice. Hence it cannot be a definition of justice.

This dialectic thus involves three terms: it starts with (1) a definition of justice, and (2) certain criterial properties of justice, and shows these to conflict when we try (3) to realize the definition in a general practice. We shall see a parallel with Hegel’s dialectical arguments, both historical and ontological, which always operate with three terms, the true purpose or standard, an inadequate conception of it, and the reality where they meet and separate.

We can thus see how a Hegelian dialectic can get started without our having to accept at the outset Hegel’s entire vision. We only need to find a starting point whereby some finite reality is to be seen as the (attempted) realization of a goal or fulfilment of a standard. It is not necessary that this goal or standard which we identify at the beginning be that of spirit returning to itself. It is enough that the historical purpose go beyond men’s subjective understanding of their own goals, so that the latter can be shown as a self-defeating misconception of the former, or that we have a standard which shares some criterial properties with realized Geist.

Then, (provided our arguments hold) a dialectic can get going, in which our first conception (or the first historical form) being shown to be inadequate is replaced by another. Hegel insists on the point, that once a dialectical argument gets going, there is no arbitrary play in it, but each stage is determined by the previous one. Since the contradiction which affects our first stage or conception has a determinate shape, it is clear what changes have to be undertaken to overcome it. And this sets the nature of the next stage. But this second stage itself may be shown to be prey to contradiction, for its realization may be uncombinable with the criterial properties in another way, or fall into contradiction in attempting to embody them; or frustrate the historical purpose in its own fashion. And then the dialectic moves on to a fresh stage. Thus following a dialectical movement is not like deploying a sceptical argument, Hegel claims, where the proof that a form is in contradiction leaves us in the void. Each contradiction has a determinate outcome; it leaves us with a positive result. (PhG, 68.)

Hence given a starting point in a reality which is a realized standard or purpose, and granted that all the arguments work, we could climb from stage to stage up to a conception of the whole as Geist which alone successfully incorporates contradiction.

But this account may not make us very much more sanguine about the prospects of Hegel’s ascending dialectics. For it is not enough that we be able to look on something as the realization of an intrinsic goal, that this be one way we could look at things. Such a problematic starting point could yield by dialectical argument a view of things which might convince us by its plausibility, but it would not be a binding argument, it would not command our assent in all rigour. To do the work Hegel wants, this starting point has to be undeniable. And this seems a tall order.

But it is one Hegel undertakes to fulfil. We shall see later that it is just the difficulty of sustaining this claim which undermines the whole system. Where his arguments do not work it is usually because they turn on a putative intrinsic purpose or standard which is not irrefutably established. And we shall note later an important distinction to be drawn between different dialectics in Hegel which turns on the nature of the starting point.

But as far as the PhG is concerned Hegel can and does vindicate his starting point. For we are dealing with consciousness. And our starting point is going to be the knowing subject. But this, unlike a stone or river, is already something which must be defined in terms of purpose realized, in terms of achievement – even in the eyes of ‘natural’ consciousness. ‘Knowing’, as we could put it, is an achievement verb. But then our gross, ordinary conceptions of this consciousness can be the starting points of a dialectic. For supposing we could show that knowledge, as they interpret it, is in fact unrealizable (by necessity), that what fulfilled their formulae could not be called knowledge by their own criteria. We should in this case have uncovered a deep contradiction or incoherence in the ordinary view which would require its amendment.

This is in fact how Hegel presents things in the introduction to PhG (70–3). To test the validity of knowledge claims, we need a yardstick or standard (Maßstab). But it would violate the principle of our procedure here if this came from outside, from someone who claimed superior knowledge of how things are. But this, argues Hegel, is not necessary in this case. Knowing consciousness distinguishes (unterscheidet) within itself our knowing from the object known. Consciousness is bi-polar: it is consciousness of something; and this means that its contents are not just inert, but bear on something outside. As a knowing subject my thoughts, perceptions, etc., are also knowledge claims.

Now we cannot compare the world-as-I-see-it, or the world-as-I-claim-to-know-it with the world-in-itself as yardstick. But what can serve as yardstick is the conception we have formed of what it is for a claim to be successful, i.e., what is veridical knowledge. And this involves no appeal to a standard outside consciousness. We rather appeal to its own conception of truth. ‘Therefore, in what consciousness within its own self designates as the An sich or the true, we have the standard by which consciousness itself proposes to measure its knowledge’ (PhG, 71).4 What we compare with this is its effective knowing. If we can show that this could not meet its own standard, if we can show that in trying to meet this standard, we cannot but produce something incompatible with it, then we have uncovered a contradiction which cannot leave our conception of knowledge unchanged.

In showing that our effective knowing cannot meet the established standard, it may appear that we are showing the inadequacy of this knowing. But in fact the more fundamental critique is of the standard. For if we show that it cannot be met, then either we have got it wrong, or there can never be knowledge. But the second alternative is one we cannot embrace; we would refute this thesis in formulating it. Knowledge there is, and it is an achievement, the realization of a standard. If the standard we conceive is unrealizable, we have to conceive again. Hence, as Hegel says, ‘the test is not only a test of knowledge, but also of its standard’ (73).

Hence it is that Hegel has managed here to latch on to a starting point that must be seen as a realized standard, and hence is able to start an ascending dialectic from the most natural and unsophisticated conception of the knowing subject, which he calls ‘sensible certainty’. He can make good his promise, at least in the opening parts of the work, not to import any knowledge or insight from outside, but to follow only the movement of ordinary consciousness itself. This movement will arise from the contradictions in ordinary consciousness, which will come to light as its standards are confronted with its effective being.

But we might still be puzzled by this claim to be making an immanent critique. The philosophers who write and read the PhG are surely seeing things that many plain men do not. Something differentiates them from ordinary consciousness. What is it if not some further insight or knowledge? Hegel’s answer is that philosophers are only distinct from the plain man here in holding clearly up to light what is already implicit in what ordinary consciousness recognizes. They make no contribution (Zutat, 72) of their own. Or if one likes, their contribution (Zutat, 74) is only to hold and connect together in a steady gaze what ordinary consciousness experiences without connecting.

For this dialectic is lived and experienced by ordinary consciousness. This is indeed how Hegel defines the term ‘experience’ in the PhG. Contradiction leads to the breakdown of one mode of consciousness and its replacement by another. But what is missing in this ordinary experience and present in the philosopher’s account is the connection, an understanding why the first form broke down and how it came to be replaced by its successor. Ordinary consciousness experiences change; we philosophers see it as dialectical movement.

Starting from the ordinary conception of knowledge which an unsophisticated finite subject has of himself, Hegel hopes to climb through several stages to a form of consciousness which will no longer be a prey to contradiction, but will be able to hold it reconciled within itself. This will be real, or absolute knowledge.

The itinerary thither will be the phenomenology of Spirit, in which consciousness will fight through and eventually overcome the point of view from which it seems to be involved with what is foreign to it (‘ mit Fremdartigem behaftet’, p. 75), and come to see itself as the self-knowledge of Geist. The road through and beyond this appearance (Schein) of isolated dependent existence is the phenomenology, and its stages present us with a series of forms of consciousness (Gestalten des Bewußtseins).

Already it will be clear that this work will have considerable scope. But in reality it stretches still wider than the above discussion implies. Hegel’s aim is not just to take us through the various forms of knowing consciousness (Bewußtsein in the narrow sense); he must also trace the developing forms of consciousness as subject of action and desire, the subject as it sees itself or as it strives to become (what Hegel calls ‘Self-consciousness’ – ‘Selbstbewußtsein’). And this is essential to his purpose; for in taking us from a view of the subject as isolated consciousness to one which sees him as a vehicle of the self-knowledge of Geist, he has to do more than alter our conception of knowledge, he must also make us change our notion of the self. But some of the crucial transitions which bring about this transformation are not powered by contradictions in our manner of knowing, but rather by those which arise in the claims we make on the world, others and ourselves as agents.

Thus alongside the dialectic of knowing, that of ‘consciousness’, we see a dialectic of desire and fulfilment, of ‘self-consciousness’. The root of this latter is what Hegel calls our ‘certainty of self’ (Selbstgewißheit), a rich concept which designates at once our notion of ourselves and the state for which we strive. This concept can be understood out of the expressivist background to Hegel’s thought. Man strives for an external embodiment which expresses him, and is frustrated in this aim when the realities on which he depends in order to be, reflect something alien to him. Certainty of self is the confidence that everything on which we depend is not alien, that we are ‘at home’ (bei sich) in it. One might think of it as our definition of our integrity in the broadest sense. But since we are beings who live in continuous relation with external reality, and rely on it to be (if only because we need to breathe, eat, stand on something), any notion of self-certainty makes certain claims on this reality; certain things are required of the surrounding world if this self-certainty is to be fulfilled. This men struggle to bring about.

But what if a given notion of self-certainty not only is unfulfilled but cannot be in the nature of things; if the surrounding reality cannot ratify this notion of ourselves? Then action out of this idea is in a sense contradictory; it frustrates what it is meant to fulfil. Our ‘truth’ (Wahrheit), as Hegel calls our real predicament, cannot be made to match our certainty. We have then a dialectic in which our self-certainty plays the role of yardstick and in which our ‘truth ‘is matched against it. If they are in principle non-congruent, then as with knowledge above, the yardstick must change.

The most famous example of a dialectic of this form is that of the master and the slave, which we will come to below. Having shown that man needs the recognition of others to ratify his self-certainty (having, that is, shown the contradictory nature of forms of self-certainty which do not involve recognition), Hegel shows how the attempt to achieve it unilaterally is doomed to failure. For the victorious struggle to wrest it from another ends either in his death or in his enslavement, and in either case the goal of recognition is frustrated.

This dialectic leads thus to a development of our self-notion. And this in the Phenomenology is woven into the dialectic of knowledge. The latter occupies the first section on ‘Consciousness’ (Bewußtsein) the former the second on ‘Self-consciousness’ (Selbstbewußtsein). The two are then in a sense combined in Chapter v on Reason. For we start again with a dialectic of consciousness, but one which is grounded on the certainty that human reason will meet itself in the world. And after another dialectic of self-consciousness, we go to a higher synthesis in the notion of individuality, which in turn passes over into another much richer dialectic, that of Spirit.

In the PhG, this meant what later is called ‘objective spirit’, and we have here a notion of the self no longer as that of isolated individuals, but rather as inhering in the human community. This in turn makes possible the passage to absolute spirit in the form of religion (Ch. VII), in which we prepare the transition to a notion of consciousness as the self-consciousness of Geist. In both these cases, the dialectic can no longer be seen as simply one of knowledge or one of certainty and truth, but integrates the two. It is the dialectic we see at work in history.

The extraordinary sweep of the PhG can be seen in this, that it starts with a theory of immediate knowledge and culminates in a brief philosophy of history and of the development of religion. But the latter is implicit in the goal which is introduced with the former, viz. to pass through the different figures of human consciousness until we arrive at a concept which can maintain itself against contradiction. We should therefore not object if en route we discover that those figures of man’s consciousness which take him as an individual are radically inadequate, that we have to see him as the vehicle of a wider consciousness, that of a political society, and finally that of Geist, if we are to discover a form of man’s understanding of self and world which will not collapse from its own weight. For Hegel is claiming that the only consistent view of human consciousness and knowledge is one that sees it as the self-knowledge of Geist. There is thus no hope of a defensible result as long as we remain with the lone man facing a world which is other. But once we see man as the vehicle of a supra-individual subject, such as the state, then some of the crucial transitions will be between forms of state organization, and hence in following them we will be tresspassing on the terrain of the philosophy of history. In principle this should not surprise us, since as we saw with Hegel there is no way to isolate phenomenology as a propadeutic from the main body of his philosophy; the only thing that may surprise is the scope, which makes the PhG into an abbreviated version of some of the principal parts of Hegel’s system.

But this is not all. Hegel draws his net wider than we might think necessary. Many readers have been struck by the tendency in this, as in all of Hegel’s systematic works, to start as it might appear all over again at the bottom with each new section. This is one of the things which makes many of the Hegelian transitions difficult to follow and more questionable than they need be. Having shown the necessity of passing to a new way of regarding the question, Hegel does not remain at the level of conceptual sophistication he has attained, but starts off presenting this new way of approach in its most primitive form, being content to climb back slowly and generate once more in this new domain the sophisticated language he had previously earned the right to use.

Thus Hegel finishes his first section, Consciousness, with a flourish in which he shows that consciousness turns necessarily into self-consciousness. He has in the process deployed some of the language of his advanced speculative theory, such as ‘infinity’, the division of the self-identical, and so on. Yet he starts the section on self-consciousness without using any of this advanced paraphernalia, at the bottom, as it were, with a study of life and desire. Universality, which was shown to be a necessary part of the baggage of consciousness, must be shown again afresh in connection with self-consciousness.

Or again, Hegel finishes the chapter on Reason with the concept of the self-law-giving individual, and passes over to (objective) spirit, or man’s life in the political community. This might be thought to justify our tackling this domain at a fairly advanced level. But Hegel chooses to start with the Greeks. In the chapter on Religion, he starts back with the Persians.

This habit – many examples can be found in all of Hegel’s other systematic works – might seem to betray a kind of compulsive encyclopaedism. And it certainly makes Hegel’s transitions less rigorous links than he sometimes pretends. But there is method in these seeming meanderings. It must not be lost sight of that the aim of these exercises is to demonstrate from our ordinary consciousness, or our everyday categories, or the existence of finite things (depending on the work in question), that we must end up with the Hegelian notion of self-knowing Geist by purely immanent argument, that is, in following a dialectic without presuppositions.

But in fact the starting point of such a demonstration is the one arbitrary thing. Eventually everything will be shown to emanate from the absolute, but in starting the argument one just has to take something as given and proceed from there. Hegel chooses as starting points realities or categories or ideas as distant from his end point as possible so as to strengthen his case. But this judgement of ‘distance’ is rather approximate and intuitive, at least before the system has been derived.

In order to make his demonstrations convincing therefore Hegel is led to cover all the angles; rather than proceeding on the shortest path to the goal, he is inclined to try to show that given any starting point one will get there. This is the more important in that this demonstration serves not only the purpose of establishing the basic Hegelian notion, but also of showing how everything is a part of it. There is thus a drive towards all-inclusiveness in Hegel’s major demonstrative works. Hence the often surprising detours to take in some major idea or phenomenon, and hence the tendency when entering a new domain to start at the bottom.

The image to represent Hegel’s system is not a single flow, but rather a river system; starting at the source he travels to the first tributary, then instead of continuing on the main stream he insists on exploring this arm from its headwaters, and so on down; until he can show that all the waters of the vast system flow into the estuary of absolute spirit.

But of course no work can be all-inclusive. There is always some principle of selection. And most readers have found the collection of subjects taken up in the PhG baffling, including as it does theories of knowledge and historical civilizations, visions of man of great formative importance to our civilization, like stoicism, and slightly absurd contemporary fads, like phrenology. Some have suggested that the principle of selection is an autobiographical one: these stages represent the theories, attitudes, aspirations or periods of history which Hegel adopted or reflected upon and which enabled him to win through to his mature vision. There is something in this, of course. But the autobiographical interpretation can easily be pushed too far. There is no evidence that Hegel was ever a believer in phrenology. And on the other side, the rich studies of Judaism and the life of Christ are absent from the PhG, leaving traces only in the theme of unhappy consciousness.

A much more plausible interpretation would be that Hegel was influenced as to what to include by the currents, beliefs and aspirations of the time. This would make sense in a work designed to take people from where they were to the perspective of absolute science. And this would explain his preoccupation with certain Romantic positions and with the issue of Kantian moral theory.

In fact the PhG is much too rich for us to go through systematically, even if we leave aside the detail. In addition, many sections touch on matters which Hegel took up later. What I should like to do is examine certain sections only which throw light on his position, and simply give the general direction of argument in the others in order to show the movement of the whole work. In later chapters, I shall have occasion to refer back to some of the sections which are passed too quickly over here.

2
The opening arguments of the PhG are a good illustration of Hegel’s immanent critique. The notion of consciousness with which Hegel starts his dialectical critique is one he calls ‘sensible certainty’. This is a view of our awareness of the world according to which it is at its fullest and richest when we simply open our senses, as it were, to the world and receive whatever impressions come our way, prior to any activity of the mind, in particular conceptual activity. ‘We therefore have to take up a non-mediate or receptive stance, that is, to alter nothing in [this awareness] as it presents itself and to take things in free from conceptualization’ (von dem Auffassen das Begreiffen abzuhalten, PhG, 79). Now, according to the view called sensible certainty, this pure receptivity is supposed to give us the richest knowledge, as well as the truest, and both these for the same reason, viz. that * it has as yet left nothing out but has the object before it in its plenitude’ (loc. cit.).

This view has evidently a certain resemblance to empiricism. It is not identical with empiricism, since it is not by any means as fully specified. But the idea of consciousness as primordially receptivity, prior to any intellectual (i.e., conceptual) activity, is a recognizably empiricist theme, as is the view that a greater degree of certainty attaches to the deliverances of this receptivity than to any judgements we might make on the basis of it.

Now Hegel’s way of entering the dialectical movement here is to ask the subject of sensible certainty to say what it experiences. We can see here at work the same basic idea that Herder espoused, that human, reflective consciousness is necessarily linguistic consciousness, that it has to be expressed in signs. But if we are bringing to bear a thesis of this kind, are we not violating our method, and importing ideas, information, theories from outside ordinary consciousness?

Hegel clearly does not think so here. Rather, he treats the ability to say as one of the criterial properties of knowing. And it is hard not to agree with him. For clearly implicit in knowing in the sense relevant here is a certain awareness of what is known. We are after all not dealing with know-how, or with unconscious cunning, or anything of the sort, but with knowledge which we have in waking experience. If we know something in this sense, then we must be able to say what we know, and this even if we have not got the (adequate) words for it, even if we put it stumblingly and badly, and are forced to use words like ‘ineffable’. The point is only that what is known be enough of an object of awareness that we can put ourselves to the task of trying to describe it. An experience about which nothing at all could be said, not even that it was very difficult if not impossible to describe, would be below the threshold of awareness which we consider essential for knowledge (in the sense relevant here, i.e., knowledge of the currently experienced). It would have either been lived unconsciously, or else have been so peripheral that we had or could recover no hold on it.

So in asking the subject of sensible certainty to say what he knows we are asking him to produce a bit of effective knowledge gained in this mode of consciousness. And this is where the contradiction arises. Sensible certainty is supposed to be immeasurably rich compared to conceptual consciousness because nothing has yet been selected, or abstracted, or put in a category with other phenomena not now present. The whole scene is there in its richness and particularity. But now we see that in order to know something we have to be able to say something about it; and to say something about it we have to focus on some dimension or other of the reality before us. The great richness of this form of consciousness turns out to be purely apparent: as we‘take in’the scene before us, we might mistakenly believe that we are taking in an inexhaustible richness of detail, because in fact an inexhaustible number of detailed things could be said about this scene. But the requirement that we say what we know shows that what we are really aware of is a selection from this inexhaustible fund, for in grasping things under some descriptions, we exclude (for the present) being aware of them under others. Looking at the objects in my study under their ordinary descriptions as use objects (typewriter, desk, chairs, etc.), I cannot see them as pure shapes; or looking at them as pure shapes, I cannot see them as the juxtaposition of different materials, and so on.

In other words, the exigencies of awareness are that we focus on certain dimensions of the objects before us, make certain ways of seeing them prepotent. Consciousness which is aware is selective. This cannot help coming out as soon as we are asked to say what we know.

Thus, says Hegel, sensible certainty, far from being the richest form of consciousness, would in fact be the poorest, for its very lack of selectivity condemns it to emptiness. To go beyond selection in the attempt to ‘take in everything’ can only be to fall over into unconsciousness, a trance-like stare. (The references to ‘pure Being’ evoke parallel arguments in the Logic.)Thus the attempt to realize the effective knowledge of sensible certainty clashes with its basic conditions. If there is such a state of unselective, immediate consciousness, then we have to snap out of it in order to know. Hence sensible certainty as a conception or ‘yardstick’ of knowledge is a prey to contradiction. As soon as we attempt to realize it we must see that it clashes with certain of the criterial properties of knowledge. It is in principle unrealizable.

Sensible certainty not only turns out to be unrealizable in its claim to unselective knowledge, but also in its claim to immediate contact with sensible particulars, without the mediation of general terms. If being aware of something is being able to say something about it, then it involves grasping the objects before us through aspects they have in common or could have in common with other things, rather than in their own particularity. It is this impossibility of bare knowledge of the particular rather than the necessity for selection that Hegel devotes most attention to in this first chapter.

Hegel’s argument for the necessary mediation of knowledge through a concept or universal has basically two stages: In the first, he imagines the protagonist of sensible certainty answering the request to say by pure demonstratives (‘this’ or ‘here’ or ‘now’). Hegel could argue at this point that these must be inadequate expressions of what I am aware of, that a term such as ‘this’ or ‘now’, applying as it can indifferently to many different contents, itself functions as a universal, and hence shows that there can be no immediate knowledge of the particular-knowledge, that is, unmediated by general terms. As a matter of fact, in Hegel’s particular usage of the term, this likeness of function is enough to class these demonstratives as universals (as he will also class the ‘I’). ‘Such a simple referential term, which comes about through negation, which is neither this nor that, a not-this, and so which can be indifferently either this or that, is what we call a universal’ (PhG, 82).

This stage continues with a consideration of the possible riposte on behalf of sensible certainty: that we can identify the particular time and place meant by ‘here’ and ‘now’ by adding that they are the here and now that I am contemplating. But T’ in this context, as Hegel points out, is as much a ‘universal’ as ‘this’. I mean, of course, one particular person, but I succeed as little in saying which particular person in saying, ‘I’, as I do in saying what particular thing in saying ‘this’.

But of course this will not satisfy the protagonist of sensible certainty. And Hegel’s assimilation of ‘I’ to the demonstrative terms discussed earlier just brings the malaise to a head. I cannot say who is meant by ‘I’ or ‘this’ or ‘now’ in a way that will be available to anyone regardless of context; and, for the same reason, sentences containing such words cannot be just transplanted from their context and retain the same truth value. But when I say ‘I’ or ‘this’, I know what I mean, and I can show you, if you will just place yourself in the same context.

Here we come to the real idea underlying the notion of sensible certainty. As a pure contact with the particular, it is of course only available in context, and as a knowledge unmediated by concepts, it can of course only be shown. In this second stage of his argument, Hegel is getting down to the real issue:

We have to be shown [the object]; for the truth of this immediate relation is the truth of this I, who restricts himself to one here and now. If we tried to take this truth in afterwards or from a distance, it would have no meaning; for we would do away with the immediacy which is essential to it.

(PhG, 85)

We come across here, in another form, the familiar theme of ostensive definition. This is the nub of the argument.

Hegel’s answer is not dissimilar to Wittgenstein’s in the Investigations, and follows the line sketched above. I cannot know even what I mean in this context if all I can say is ‘this ‘or ‘here’. For what do these terms embrace? Take ‘now’: does it mean this punctual instant, this hour, this day, this decade, this epoch? It can mean all of these, and others in different contexts. But, for it to mean something for me, and not just be an empty word, there must be something else I could say to give a shape, a scope, to this ‘now’; let it be a term for a time period, such as ‘day’ or ‘hour’, or some description of the event or process or action that is holding my attention and hence defining the dimensions of my present.

And so, Hegel concludes, there is no unmediated knowledge of the particular. Sensible certainty ends up saying the opposite of what it means (88), and this is the proof of its contradictory nature. Any attempt at effective awareness of the particular can only succeed by making use of descriptive, i.e. general, terms. The purely particular is ‘unreachable’. What remains beyond description as the ‘unexpressible…is nothing other than the untrue, irrational, simply pointed to’ (das Unwahre, Unvernunftige, bloss Gemeinte, 88). And by the same token, the particular is the subject of potentially endless description; for at any point, descriptions in general terms will not have captured its particularity, and yet there is nothing further to be done in order to express this particularity other than more description in general terms.

The thesis as here presented will not seem strange, or even wrong, to many contemporary philosophers. But the argument and its conclusion are presented by Hegel in a way that reflects certain major themes particular to his philosophy. Thus the unavailability of the bare particular is not just an epistemological truth; it reflects the ontological one that the particular is doomed by its very nature to disappear, that it is in principle mortal. What is permanent is the concept. So the unsayability of the particular is simply the expression of its ontological status, as that which cannot remain, that which must pass. And reciprocally, external particular existence is impermanent because it cannot be expressed in concepts.

That is why it is astounding, says Hegel, how some philosophers can continue to hold to the sensible reality of the particular as the final ground of knowledge. Even the beasts are wiser than this:

…for they don’t remain standing before sensible things as though they existed an sich, but, despairing of this reality and in the full certainty of its nullity, they fall right to and consume them.

(PhG, 87)

But, in Hegel’s ontology, if it is true that the particular is mortal, it is also true that it exists of necessity, that the concept, the Idea cannot be outside of its embodiment in (a series of) particulars. The concept reveals itself in the procession of particulars, their coming to be and passing away. The particular can only be understood as a passing vehicle for the concept.

This background of theory makes Hegel present the argument for the unsayability of the particular in a fashion peculiar to himself. The argument reflects not just the impossibility of bare unmediated knowledge of the particular, but also the movement underlying experience itself. As particular sensuous beings, we encounter particular things, we come across them, as it were, with our senses. But as soon as we try to grasp them, they disappear, so to speak; we can hold onto them only by subsuming them under a concept. In Hegelian language, our attempt to grasp things in knowledge first negates them as particulars; then, negating this negation, we recover them by grasping them through mediated conceptual consciousness. The immediate is negated, but it is retained in mediated form.

The term in connection with which Hegel presents this argument is ‘now’; and although there are some respects in which this particular example is unrepresentative, the point is plainly meant to be general. The ‘now’ of sensible certainty could be understood in its most immediate sense as designating the punctual present. But this is no sooner designated than it is past, hence gone, ‘negated’; but when we fall back on a description that gives the scope of our present, say ‘today’ or ‘this hour’, the immediately fleeting present is recuperated and reintegrated into this larger ‘now’; the first negation is negated.

This example is less illuminating than it might be, because the particular fleetingness of time, whose punctual instants vanish in becoming past, cannot be matched easily in the discussion of ‘here’ or ‘this’. But the general point seems to be this: in experience we meet particulars; we can grasp these particular things only by in some sense ‘pointing’, either literally or by focusing on a thing in a way we could only convey through the use of some demonstrative or related word. But the experience itself of pointing (Aufzeigen) is that, in trying to grasp the thing, we show the fleeting, unseizable nature of the particular, and we can recover it and hold it before our gaze, as it were, only by subsuming it under a universal.

In other words, ‘to point something out is to experience that “now” is a universal’ (das Aufzeigen ist das Erfahren, daß Jetzt Allgemeines ist, PhG, 86). And by that terminal ‘ist’ Hegel means to convey the point that this experience brings us to the ontological truth of the matter, that the particular only is, as a vehicle for the concept. But what is germane from our point of view here is that Hegel has not just argued to the impossibility of unmediated knowledge of particulars and the necessary role of concepts, but wants to present the idea that the argument, as the depiction of an attempt to grasp the particular that fails, reflects our experience itself, as we encounter and reach out for particulars and discover that we can only really hold them through the mediating instruments of universal concepts.

I have tried to set out Hegel’s argument in this first chapter in some detail partly because it fits so well his own description of an ascending dialectic, and partly because the points taken up here – the necessity of selection, the fleeting nature of the particular – are basic Hegelian themes. There is unfortunately no space to go into the detail of the argument in the other two chapters which make up this part of the PhG, called ‘Consciousness’. I shall just give its general direction.5

The new form which Hegel sees arising out of the dialectic of sensible certainty is a view of the object as a thing with properties. This conception of the object of knowledge, which Hegel calls ‘perception’, combines our understanding of it as a particular with the insight we have just gained, viz., that it can only be grasped through general descriptions.

This is the starting point for a new dialectic in which Hegel tries to show that experience defined in terms of this object reveals itself once more as contradictory, for the object itself suffers an inner contradiction. In order to get a coherent view of the object of experience we have to go over to a dynamic conception, one which sees the object as the locus of causal force.

Hegel then starts the third chapter with this new conception of the object as the locus of force. The chapter considers a number of ways of understanding an object of this kind. With the introduction of the notion of force, we have a two-tiered conception of the object, one in which its outer, manifest properties can be seen as products of an inner force or forces. Hegel goes through a number of ways of conceiving this inner-outer relation: e.g., characterizing the inner source of phenomena as the ‘supersensible’, or understanding this source in terms of law. He claims to show that all these break down and lead us inescapably to a notion of the object as the external manifestation of an inner necessity which must manifest itself. Its different features or properties, which are merely contingently linked by natural laws, are shown to be differentiations of an inner identity which necessarily differentiates itself.

We come thus to Hegel’s notion of the Concept, the Idea of necessity which necessarily posits its own external manifestation. And since this concept shows itself to have the structure of subjectivity, we have made a transition from consciousness to self-consciousness. In speaking of the identical which divides itself, or the idea which is necessarily embodied, we are using formulae which belong to the subject.

What we have discovered therefore is that the structure of the object known and that of the subject are one and the same. Our consciousness is thus not of a foreign reality, but rather ‘consciousness of another, of an object in general, is in fact necessarily self-consciousness, reflectedness in self, consciousness of oneself in one’s other’ (PhG, 128).6

The curtain which hid the transphenomenal has thus been pulled away, we discover that what lies behind it is identical with what stood before it (consciousness). ‘It becomes clear that behind the so-called curtain which is supposed to veil the Inner, there is nothing to see unless we step behind it, not just in order that there be someone who can see, but just as much to have something there to be seen’ (PhG, 129).7

This is obviously an important transition for Hegel. But I do not propose to go into the argument here, for two reasons. First, because this transition is better and more thoroughly done in the Logic which moves from the two-tiered concepts of the Essence to the Concept. And secondly, because the argument, whatever its ultimate validity in Hegel’s work as a whole, is rather unconvincingly presented here. Thus our ordinary (Hume-influenced) view of natural laws as contingent correlations is judged unsatisfactory and this plays an important role in the argument. It contradicts the ‘concept of law’ which requires an inner connection between the terms linked. Hegel’s grounds for this view are that the law, expressed in a relationship between different terms, must also be seen as the emanation of a single underlying force or necessity. But this is not at all convincingly demonstrated and the reader has the feeling that the argument is circular here, that it is only because inner necessity is assumed as a requirement, that it comes out in Hegel’s conclusions about the nature of the object.

Hegel seems here to have fallen prey to one of the dangers which beset dialectical arguments, that of imputing a yardstick or standard to the object under study which in fact is open to question, and which leads us unerringly to our conclusion at the cost of straining credibility at the starting point. In this case the requirement that our conception of natural law must find a place for the notion of inner necessity seems to be such an imputation.

Let us turn now to the second section of the PhG.

 

 

1 Kenley Royce Dove translation in Martin Heidegger, Hegel’s Concept of Experience, New York, 1970, p. 10.

2 ‘Hegel’s phenomenological Method’ in Review of Metaphysics, June 1970, V. XXII, no. 4.

3 This does not mean that there are a number of historical forms of knowledge which are correctly characterized as sensible certainty, perception, etc. For the basic properties of these early, inadequate conceptions is that they are in error about themselves. It is this clash between their self-idea and their effective reality which is the motor of the dialectic. But to the extent that they are in error, they are distortions of knowledge, which can be accounted for adequately neither by their own self-image nor by the conception of perfect knowledge.

4 K. R. Dove translation (amended), p. 20.

5 For a discussion of the argument of the second chapter, and the relation of this section of the PhG to certain contemporary arguments, see my ‘The opening arguments of the Phenomenology’ in Alasdair Maclntyre (Ed.) Hegel, New York, 1972, pp. 151–87.

6 ‘das Bewußtsein eines Andern, eines Gegenstandes überhaupt, ist zwar selbst notwendig Selbstbewußtsein, Reflektiertsein in sich, Bewusßtsein seiner selbst in seinem Anderssein’ (p. 128).

7 ‘Es zeigt sich, daß hinter dem sogenannten Vorhange, welcher des Innre verdecken soll, nichts zu sehen ist, wenn wir nicht selbst dahintergehen, ebensosehr damit gesehen werde, als daß etwas dahinter sei, das gesehen werden kann’.

 
    