# Chapter Two

Perception

§8. Consciousness of perception and its object

a) Perception as mediation and transition from sense certainty to understanding

We now have a new object, which indeed arises necessarily from the previous one. Perception, the new object for us, who know in an absolvent manner, is again and for the first time legitimately a knowing, in accordance with its basic character. But the necessity of its objectivity for us is (as a necessity of mediation) different from the necessity of the objectivity of sense certainty. This latter necessity is mediated; and for the sake of that mediation sense certainty pretends, as it were, to be its possible victim.

However, since we are not merely going along with Hegel but rather following his text interpretively, it is important at this point to consider the following. Perception does arise for us; but as long as we are satisfied with the above-mentioned difference between perception as object and sense certainty as object, perception does not confront us as an absolvent object (as object held in absolvence). Perception as what is mediated is mediated not only in the sense of being inevitably detected in sense certainty, but also at the same time in the sense of being that which is placed in the middle. That means that, if we grasp perception’s absolute objectivity only from the side of sense certainty and perception’s absolvent origin, then we conceive it one-sidedly and thus not absolutely. It is exactly at this juncture that perception should be conceived as the middle term between …, so that we must here already look to the other side whither perception, as middle and between, is to be mediated further and beyond in the direction of its absolvent future. As the middle, perception is precisely a transition toward …; in perception the movement of absolvence is, as it were, really and truly unsettled.

Perception knows no rest. Hence, that toward which perception moves must already emerge in perception itself. Perception itself is not to be taken as an inevitable outcome, as indeed it was with regard to sense certainty. What perception is going to be belongs already to perception. Perception is only what it is in its having been and its future.

If we here deliberately point to the temporal moments in the “being” [Sein] of what is to be known in an absolvent manner, we do so knowing full well that we are going beyond Hegel, and not simply in a direction that Hegel accidentally failed to take up as his own problem. We are, rather, taking a direction which would have turned against him, had he followed it. But this happens only if the fundamental problematic of time is unfolded from out of the problem of being itself. It is not enough—and indeed amounts to a complete misunderstanding of the problem—if we look into what Hegel or someone else said about time. Rather, we must see that Hegel circumscribes time in the same way as he determines the I: logico-dialectically, in accordance with a predetermined idea of being.

As we already saw, Hegel occasionally speaks about having been, but never about the future. This accords with his view of the past as the decisive character of time: It is a fading away, something transitory and always bygone. Consequently, we find here an orientation toward time and the past which reveals—in a different and indeed thoroughly radical way—a “crossroad.”

Although Hegel’s presentation of perception has an architectonic similar to that manifest in the treatment of sense certainty, its proper movement is different. This movement is different insofar as perception, in itself a detected middle, mediates a third moment: understanding. Just as perception is in a way the truth of sense certainty, so precisely as this truth perception is at the same time the untruth of understanding.

Accordingly, the title of the second part of “A. Consciousness” must be read in the right way. We are already prepared for such a reading in the treatment of the first part. Hegel discusses the title “Sense Certainty” through “the this and intending” and the title “Perception” through “thing and deception.” The expressions “thing and deception” and “this and intending” look like a mere juxtaposition and enumeration of the two interpenetrating moments of consciousness (the known and the knowing of it). But we saw that “intending” has a double thrust. Intending says that the object is essentially one which is “intended,” is mine, and that it is the object for sense knowledge; but it thereby also says that the truth of the object returns in a higher truth as perception. Correspondingly, the expression deception in the title of the second part says more than one may initially presume. Initially the expression deception could be taken to mean that, as we perceive things, we may be deceived or that perception may be sometimes true and sometimes false. But this view of deception would reflect only what occasionally “happens” to perception and would make no claim to be identified as necessarily belonging to the essence of perception, in the sense of that which is known in absolvence. What Hegel actually means by deception is that perception is in itself a deception, a continual self-deception, a talking oneself into something; and it “is” such insofar as the being of perception is conceived in absolvence, which is the only way to conceive perception if one follows Hegel. Perception already implies an intelligibility, an understanding; but this rendering intelligible is mere “sophistry.”1 It is not the intelligibility of pure understanding, but the intelligibility of perceptual understanding. Therefore, the absolvent presentation of perception is essentially concerned with showing how in perception itself a certain intelligibility and reflection takes on pretensions and thus emerges as a play of forces in the form of “empty abstractions.”2 This perceptual understanding is what is often called “sound common sense.”3

Just as sophistry and sophistic illusion are defined in Plato, Aristotle, and Kant in accordance with the truth and the level of their basic philosophical quest in each case, so also in Hegel common understanding bears his mark. However, considering its roots, this is the same understanding which has been at work since philosophy became actual.

But even Hegel’s explication of deception should not be taken one-sidedly, as if what matters to him is merely to demonstrate that common understanding appears in perception and does its mischief there. The task is to show that precisely because a perceptual understanding resides in perception, thereby perception perishes, all by itself. That means that perception is truly a middle term and a transition, one which has no permanence.

But this perishing should not be taken to mean a fluttering and scattering away into nothingness. If this were the case, then the middle term would not be conceived in its mediating character or as a transition toward something else. That is why we have to hear the positive in Hegel’s negative, when he speaks of perishing: Perishing is returning to the ground [Das Zugrundegehen ist das Zum-Grunde-Zurückgehen]. Through the mediation of perception, sense certainty first reaches understanding and therein gets to its own ground as the true mode of consciousness. Thus, the whole, in which these three moments [sense certainty, perception, and understanding] are located—Consciousness (A)—comes into its own; the whole turns into self-consciousness.

At the present stage of discussion, we should not forget that perception, the second mode of knowledge which arises for us, is consciousness and that, in spite of the reflection that perception presumes to exercise, it is not self-consciousness. To put it positively, perception, too, is and remains consciousness, a knowing that, in accordance with its manner of knowing, is always and initially directed toward the object as what is other and alien, and initially finds in the object the essence of itself and what is true. However, perception does not wish to have for its object the this which is merely an intended particular; perception as taking-for-true [Wahrnehmung] avails itself of the true. But that which is true is necessarily a universal. That means a simplicity [ein Einfaches], which exists through negation and is “neither this nor that,” a not-this, such that through such negativity it is at the same time (positively) indifferent to being this as well as that (the dialectical and speculative concept of the universal).

Insofar as perception qua consciousness—as distinguished from self-consciousness—belongs to immediate knowing, perception no longer possesses what is immediate knowing; perception no longer possesses what is immediate in the particular, but rather in the universal. In its entirety, perception is “universal immediacy.”4 But precisely something like a “universal immediacy,” or immediacy of the universal, is in itself already corroded by contradiction, inasmuch as the universal, as we saw, exists essentially in and as the negation of the particular, and consequently as mediation. This contradictory essence of perception cannot sustain itself at all: It destroys itself.

We must note again and again that this process is not described as a process of consciousness, but is seen from within the absolute. If one fails to keep this in view and proceeds naively, then one has to wonder how perception can ever destroy itself, because common understanding finds no occasion for this destruction, considering perception in reference to itself and as something extant.

The task is to show how perception breaks down and mediates something else. This is to be done by way of an exposition of the history of experience which we allow perception to undergo with itself. To this end it is necessary to begin with how perception qua consciousness appears.

b) The thing as what is essential in perception. Thingness as the unity of the “also” of properties

Perception, as a mode of knowing, initially shows its moments again in such a way that the perceived or the object is what is essential, whereas perceiving is the inessential. Hence, the apportionment of the difference between the essential and the inessential is one-sided and easily seen as such. The object of perception is the thing, this thing, “this salt,”5 as this simple one which exists entirely for itself in the immediate unity and gatheredness of the white, tart, cubically shaped, heavy salt. The moments which are gathered in this one thing and which are not separated in the thing as perceived are pulled apart and unfolded in the movement of perceiving. The way this happens is again shown by the statement in which perception articulates itself. Perception does not simply say, as in sense certainty, “this salt,” whereby, as was shown, the said no longer says what was intended, because salt is something universal. Rather, perception says that this salt is white and tart and cubical and heavy, and so on. What sense certainty says, against its own intention, as it were—salt: something universal—perception expresses in such a way that it says what the salt here is. But this unfolding movement of perceiving is inconstant, against which the one simple object itself (the thing) is indifferent.

What matters in the first place, then, is to unfold in its essence the object as that which is the true in perception—doing this, of course, on the level and in the light in which the object now stands, as originating from sense certainty. Because it originates from sense certainty, the object is and remains in any case a sensible object. But its truth is the universal. However, we grasp universality as mediated simplicity. Perception itself expresses this: The object is “the thing with many properties.”6 To unfold the true for perception means only to expound what constitutes the thingness of the thing. In other words, to show how thingness makes a thing a thing. Here again what matters is to carry out an absolvent construction of the object of perception or of the thing, a construction which should verify the full essence of perception.

Hegel thus proceeds from a comparison between the object of perception and the object of sense certainty. This is not an arbitrary comparative procedure, but lies in the nature of the matter itself, because the object of perception evolves from the object of sense certainty and therefore has a historical relation to the object of sense certainty—historical [geschichtlich] in the sense of the happening of the Phenomenology itself. The object of perception is no longer that object which was the object of sense certainty—the this, or, to stay with Hegel’s example of perception, this salt which is here on the table. Perception does not mean simply and exclusively “this salt” and nothing else. Rather, perception takes for true; it is serious about grasping this salt as what the this is, and seeing that this what, the universal, is its object. And it is its object in that perception takes the object as what it is. But what is it? The object is that which can be taken by itself in the immediate saying of the “is,” which can immediately be removed and thus enumerated.

This salt is white and tart and cubical and heavy, and so on. This salt is that and that. Because the this is that and that, it is not simply this: The this is sublated in the not-this. Not-this in no way means nothing; but rather, being not only the this, the this is that and that. What the this is in being not-this, is a content; and the content emerges from out of the this, from out of what it is. What is it? White and tart—thus, not this white or this tart, with which I would mean only what has the character of a this in its whatness, without meaning the what itself. But now I grasp, not what has the character of the this, but its what. Thus, it is white and tart. What the this or the object is—its whatness [Wassein]—is a universal. But the immediacy of the this or the sensuous is preserved in this universal—white, tart. If we take the salt in this way—which is also how it is expressed in the proposition—if we thus neither simply intend the this nor do anything further about perception, then we are taking it as the white and the tart and the cubical and the heavy, etc. We differentiate these universale, take them apart, and thus regard them as many. In this way we take the many in such a way that, if we look closely, they are all indifferent to one another. In like manner the enumerated universals are all simply related to themselves—white, tart.… Indifferent to one another, they are not simply lined up in a row by means of a mere “and.” Rather, these many are, each with the same validity as another, that which the salt is. The this in its whatness is white; and the same this is tart—it is not simply white and tart but white “and abo” tart. In this “also” is expressed “just as it is white, it is also.…” In this “just as” the items that are indifferent to one another coincide and come together at the same time. The “and” indicates the mere side-by-side character of the indifferent items. But the “also” indicates the side-by-side character of these items within a simultaneous subordination to the same, which is not indicated by the “and.”

The way in which the indifferently many items are together without being concerned with one another is expressed by the “also.” The latter is the medium of thingness, the simple togetherness of the many. The possible ways of this togetherness in the “also” are already familiar to us: the here and the now (space and time). In its simple here, the salt is the together, as what the this is positively, or as the mere this is not. The “also” is the “indifferent unity,”7 or more precisely: the unity of what is indifferent. Insofar as the thing is such that it exists for itself as a one, we have in the unity of the indifferent evidently obtained one of the characters of the one, a character which expresses that the particular, the simple “also,” is in itself related to what is multiple. The “also” holds together what is multiple, although only in such a way that the universal “also” is indifferent to the multiple and thus allows the many also to remain indifferent to one another. Put more precisely: The “also” is thus the indifferent unity of the many that are indifferent to one another, but belong together.

Thus, we grasp something of the essence of the thing as the object of perception (as thinghood) without understanding how the thing can thereby be this thing that it is—or, as we said at the beginning: the thing with many properties. Insofar as we do not yet understand this in terms of the “also,” the “also” is not capable of fully determining the essence of the thing, even though something already becomes manifest in the “also” that goes further and that belongs to the thing, namely, having properties. The unity of the “also” points to this “having of properties,” because the “also” of the many shows the uniformity among them, and indifferent belonging to something, a certain being-appropriated—pro-perty.* Yet with this neither the essence of property nor the essence of the thing is achieved—both of which belong together. Only when thinghood is determined in such a way as to let us understand how thinghood becomes a thing—in the sense of how having properties belongs to it and what it itself is—only then is the essence of the thing (the true object of perception) achieved. For the time being it remains unresolved whether the essence of perception is achieved, where for perception what is essential is its object.

c) The exclusive unity of the thing as condition for having properties. The perceptual object’s having of properties and the possibility of deception

If we stick to perception’s proposition that “this salt is white, tart, and so on,” then in this statement there is not only the enumeration of everything that the this also is, but in a certain sense it emphasizes that “this” is white and not black, tart and not mild, cubical and not round. In this emphasis there is an exclusion of the opposite; and in this exclusion—and in negation in general—there is that which in each case the this “also” is: its determinateness. But because this multiple “also” carries with it in each case an opposition, the unity which ties the opposites together cannot be a simple unity of indifference. Because multiplicities are in themselves oppositional, their unity is all the more an opposing unity. The unity of the “also,” the unity of what is indifferent, does not exhaust thinghood. Rather, as the unity of opposing multiplicities, thinghood is itself the one which is so determined that, by opposing itself, it excludes the other. By means of this unity of exclusion, the unity includes itself in itself and becomes a unity for itself. Thus, thinghood (the “also”) now becomes the thing, that which stands for itself and is independent.

Thus, the multiple first becomes subordinate to what stands-for-itself, and the many in the “also” first turns out to be something which has properties. The unity of indifference (the “also”) and the unity of exclusion (the one and not the other) belong together in the full essence of thinghood. But insofar as this coupled unity is the simplicity of a manifold, the having of properties arises among the manifold. Thus, for the first time we are in a position to say something absolvent about what we encountered at the outset of sense certainty within its objectivity, namely, its “wealth.”8

The wealth of sense certainty does not belong to sense certainty.9 According to the manner of its knowing, sense certainty is incapable of having wealth belong to it as something it knows, because in each case meaning intends only the single this and not the what, the manifold, and the many in the one. But wealth can belong to perception—according to its essence—for it takes its object as the universal what, precisely as having properties. Something can belong only to a knowing which is in itself a taking [ein Nehmen]. Mere intending has no means for something like belonging to and belonging together.

Perception itself comes to recognize this manner of its knowing. Thereby perception does attain a specific consciousness. If the object of perception is necessarily the thing—as what has properties—then perceiving, if it wants to take what is true, must always take the this in its what, as that and as that and that. With this taking, which fundamentally takes from out of a multiplicity, perceiving can mistake the what by taking the object as that which the object is not: Perception can deceive itself. This possibility is not only present in perception as something that occasionally comes to pass, as something that befalls perception from somewhere else; rather, it is a possibility that belongs to taking itself, to having an object. This possibility belongs to the way in which the object is known and is thus a conscious possibility: “The percipient is conscious of the possibility of deception.”10

All of this indicates that the taking in perceiving [das Nehmen im Wahrnehmen] is no mere apprehending. But perception is initially taken as such; and in this regard perception is alleged to be inessential to the object, and vis-à-vis the object, to be impermanent and untrue—thus attributing truth exclusively to the object. However, if taking is other than apprehending and if the grasping of apprehending can go awry, then taking as perceiving must in each case grasp in the right way. Taking as such must be intent upon being a true taking. “Taking” must deliberate, think, and must understand with the aim of not making a mistake. Thereby the possibility emerges that the truth of perception does not simply fall unilaterally in the object, but also and just as much in taking. But then the initial characterization of the object of perception and the allotment of what is essential and not essential contains a contradiction, although a hidden one. Whether and how this is the case must again be shown in this knowing itself. We must set in motion a real act of perceiving and watch how it “takes” the true—the true which we have just now characterized for the essential determination of the thing with its many properties. Thereby the contradictions in the essence of perception must themselves come to light.

§9. The mediating and contradictory character of perception

Now we can say already in advance in what the contradiction of perception lies. This contradiction lies in perception itself. The knowing and taking peculiar to perception is not that of intending, which is simply let loose and continues so, absorbed in its this and remaining enslaved to it. Rather, contradiction must be shown to be in perception itself; there must be in taking itself something opposed to “this.” “Taking” takes the object as true. But since taking has the consciousness of deception, it knows in a certain way that taking itself and not the object is what is true. Perception is exactly what it is by living from this contradiction, without being serious about it, without knowing it as contradiction, and without sublation. However, we, who should know perception absolvently as a mode of consciousness, must seek the truth of perception in just this contradiction. What matters, then, is on the one hand to show in a general way how perception contradicts itself in the stated manner, how it turns around in a circle, as it were—and on the other hand to bring to light explicitly the contradictory character of perception, on the basis of both the essence of its object, projected in the process of absolvence, and the manner of its knowing. After that it must be shown how in itself perception, by contradicting itself, points beyond itself and thus is in itself mediation. It yields something else to be disclosed, something which can again only be a mode of knowing—and that is understanding.

a) The possibility of deception as the ground of the contradiction in perception as taking and reflection

The point is to experience, in and with an actual perception, how things are arranged in it. We undergo an experience. Or: We let perception undergo an experience with itself. This is to say that the transposition to an “actual perceiving,”1 wherein consciousness should undergo its experience, takes place only now, after we have constructed the object of perception.

What do I take when, in an actual perceiving of this white, tart salt, I take its true? And how is the taking itself? I take this white salt. At first the object presents itself “purely as a one.”2 But I am forbidden to take the object that way, forbidden by the property, which is the universal. Thus, I did not take the object truly; the untruth coincides with taking because the object is indeed the true. However, if I do not take the object purely as one, but as the “also,” which in each case is required by the universality of properties, then it immediately becomes manifest that even in this way I do not take the object correctly, because properties are determined and mutually exclusive. Thus, I take the object as a “one” which is exclusive. But if I take the object thus, in the universality of the “also” and of the “one,” then I take, not the object, but its medium, wherein there are many particular, determined properties for themselves. Thereby I take the particular property for itself. If this happens, then I take the property neither as it is in the “one” nor as it is in the relation to another, and thus not at all as a property. Rather, I take the particular this—white—immediately. But this immediate taking of the this is an intending. The knowing of the object, my perceiving, has become an intending.

Thus, in the face of the object of actual perception, we undergo the experience that the apprehending was not correct; taking passes over into an intending. But intending has already crossed over into perceiving. Hence, in this experience perceiving returns into itself. Perceiving does not take up the true in a simple apprehending, but it takes the true back into perceiving and thus takes the truth of what is perceived in and upon itself. Thus—corresponding to sense certainty—the truth that was originally situated in the object is taken back into knowing.

Thus, consciousness as perceiving is pushed back upon itself in the experience which it undergoes with itself—an experience which is, of course, to be understood in the light of the absolvent projection. But in what way is it pushed back upon itself? Not as that which would simply be the true, but rather pure apprehending has proved itself to be thoroughly incorrect. Thus, consciousness arrives at the point of distinguishing its apprehending of the object from the untruth of its perceiving. Taking itself needs proper guidance. Insofar and only insofar as the untruth of taking is now “corrected,”3 does the correction, the truth of perceiving, fall into perceiving. Thus—and to put it initially as a quite general observation—perceiving as consciousness has emerged as something which does not merely take or limit itself to taking, but as something which is conscious of its own reflection in itself, its bending back upon itself. A taking that reflects is a taking which does not simply take; but a taking which does not take is a contradiction in itself.

This contradictory character must nevertheless be worked out absolvently. This means that we must not understand Hegel with the methods adopted by Hegelianism, which was dead from the beginning. We must not violate Hegel with the fading and already consumptive witchcraft of an unbounded dialectic. What is important is to heed “the seriousness of the concept reaching into its depth {the depth of the matter at issue},”4 of which Hegel speaks in the preface to the Phenomenology. The point is concretely to disperse the contradictory character in the essence of perception—in what constitutes the true for it, in its object, in the thing—and to unfold this contradictory character in the whole of its being driven against and beyond itself. The experience is thus made that the object as such is finally exploded by the way in which perceiving itself tries to come to terms with and to preserve what is true for it.

But this break-up is not a simple scattering into pieces, but an annihilation within an already—if unacknowledged—actual attachment of the essence of perception to a higher truth. In the experience which we allow perception to undergo in its arguing with itself, we bring perception near to its absolvent truth. The unfolding of its contradictory character is the sublation of the truth of perception, both in the sense of its elimination and as the raising of it to its actual essence. The task now is to go through each individual stage where the truth of perception, its object, the thing, is run aground, in order to see finally what new realm perception enters in this running aground.

b) The reciprocal distribution of the contradictory one and “also” of the thing to perceiving as taking and reflection

The object of perception is the thing, the one which has many properties. Perceiving itself, as we saw, is not a mere apprehending, but, to the extent that consciousness of the possibility of deception belongs to perception, includes a reflection on its own activity, its way of taking. Both apprehending and reflection belong to perception, so much so that perception separates both from each other; not only that, but in perceiving and in securing the true taking of the true, perception plays one (reflection) against the other (apprehending), and vice versa.

This arguing which takes place in perceiving itself constantly reveals contradictions in perception, which it tries to eliminate again and again by turning itself to the one side and by alleging that the separate, other side is inessential and nothing. We shall pursue this game, holding on to the one-sidedness and keeping them opposed to each other. We shall then see how perception runs aground in itself.

Immediately and initially, what is true in perception is the thing, and that means the one, the single one. If we come across something else in this single one, like the plurality of properties—the white and also the tart—then this “also” must be taken up by consciousness. For only by keeping the “alsos” as the many separate from the one, can the one be maintained purely in its truth. The argumentative understanding can take the one as one only if it omits the many from the thing. Consciousness takes upon itself the many “alsos”—and that is indeed quite all right and plausible, for white is the thing only insofar as it is seen by our eyes, tart insofar as it is touched by our tongue, cubical insofar as it is touched by our feel. We take this variety of properties upon ourselves insofar as the eye, the tongue, etc., are kept apart in us. We are the universal medium which forces apart and provides a place for the “alsos”; and if we take back into us these many “alsos” from the thing, then we preserve for the thing its unity, its pure identity with itself.

This is the one way in which perception comes to terms with the twofold character of the thing as the one and as “also,” by crossing out the “also” and transposing it into taking. But properties are what they are as determinate, as opposed to others—white to black and so on. Because of these determinate properties, the thing is itself just the one that it is and is not another thing. Insofar as it is one, the thing by itself does not have these many determinate aspects and thus the oppositions. The unity of the thing is its mere identity with itself, on the basis of which the thing as one is identical with every other one. In order to be contrasted as the one, in order not to be the other, the thing must have its determinateness in itself. Thus, the thing must itself be the “also” and the many; it must be the universal medium wherein the many properties exist apart from one another indifferently.

But again, in order for perceiving to preserve the “also” for the thing itself—as was required above—it must take the unity upon itself. The argumentative understanding can take the many as many only if it omits unity from the thing. By contrast, the placing of the many into one, which the thing also is in each case—also white, also tart—belongs to taking, to consciousness as it takes the thing as white insofar as it is not tart, and vice versa. With the help of this “insofar as,” the separation of the many is maintained even as consciousness takes all of them together into one, the thing. In principle, oneness claims perceiving in such a way that what is called property “is represented as free matter.”5 Thus, the thing turns out to be a “collection of matters”;6 and the one becomes the mere surrounding surface, which comes from taking.

Thus, there is on the one side the one which is void of the many, and on the other side the “also” which is dissolved in independent free “matters.” Where one emerges and is to stay, the other will be driven away, and vice versa.

If we survey all of this, then we see that perceiving turns its taking alternately into one and then into the “also” as well as the thing sometimes into the “also” and sometimes into the one. For the thing itself, which still counts as the true according to the sense of perception, this means: The thing has in itself “an opposing truth.”7

At the beginning the thing was simply the true; then it became manifest that, insofar as “taking” is unhomogeneous, the thing is the true and self-identical. Now it turns out that taking, too, is reciprocally what the thing is. What applies to the thing applies also to taking. Truth is thus this reciprocal alternation of the entire movement of the one-sided distribution of one moment—of the “also” or the one—to taking or to the thing.

What results from this for the thing, to which perception in all of its vacillation, of which it is not specifically and explicitly aware, returns again and again? The mirroring of this movement in the thing indicates that the thing is in itself contradiction. But perception cannot admit something like this, because perception cannot tolerate the contradiction. Perception cannot tolerate it because, limited to itself, perception is a finite knowing. Accordingly, wherever perception encounters contradiction—and especially in what is the true for it—there it must look carefully so as not to let the contradictory elements loose against one another but to distribute them and to put them aside. Reflection carries out this distribution in such a way that it again adds the “insofar as” and thus separates the contradictory moments.

Our task is to see how and whether perception can maintain this separation and thus defend itself against contradiction.

c) The contradiction of the thing in itself—being for itself and being for an other—and the failure of the reflection of perception

The thing is one as well as the “also,” the manifold of others. However, it is one only for another; and because it is for another, the one is itself an other. Being one and being other both belong to the thing, but in different respects. The thing is other only insofar as it is not related to itself but to another. Perception says that the other is responsible for the one’s being also the other. For example, the chalk and the eraser: Chalk, the one, is also the other only because there is an eraser which itself can be the one over against which the chalk is now the other. The chalk is the other only because of the eraser. Perception does not understand that the one is not also the other because of the other, but because it is the one. As one it is not the other—not the other. That means that it is precisely in itself related to the other, whether this other factually exists or not. Assuming that there were only one single thing, this one would nevertheless be an other, because the term sole [einzig] means no others, but also no others. Given the means for understanding at its disposal, perception does not understand something like this.

The unity of the thing (its self-identity) is, as far as the apprehension of perception is concerned, not disputed by the specific thing but by other things, by virtue of the fact that they also exist. Contradiction is thus allotted to differing things. In perceiving, the different things are posited in each case as for itself. Each is an other through the other; each is the other of the other and from consciousness of it; each is different. But in this way each thing has been differentiated. If each is differentiated, then the difference belongs to the thing itself; as such, as one, the thing is an other. The adduced “insofar as” (insofar as there are other things) fails. It cannot keep from the thing its being-other and thus must allow the contradiction in the thing itself to prevail.

But argumentative perception makes one final effort against the contradiction by seeking help once again from an “insofar as,” namely, the “insofar as” of the difference between essential and inessential. For perception cannot and will not see that what constitutes the essence or the being-for-itself of the thing is exactly what should run the thing and its truth aground. And so perception goes on to argue that the thing in its being-for-itself and being-one is indeed differentiated, but that this differentiation is not an opposition in the thing itself. On the contrary, it is for itself simply the determinate that it itself is. Its essence is simple determinateness for itself. Certainly the thing is differentiated in itself insofar as it has a manifold structure. However, that by which the thing is itself and differentiates itself from others is its “simple determinateness.”8 Over against this, then, the multiplicity extant in the thing and necessarily belonging to it is inessential.

However, even this final “insofar as” cannot hold its ground. For what does it mean that in its simple determinateness the thing necessarily includes being-other, but that this being-other is inessential? What does “necessarily inessential” mean? This is something essential. Thus, the contradiction rests in the ownmost essence of the thing itself, precisely insofar as the latter is simple determinateness: Precisely insofar as the thing is being-for-itself—and in no other respect—it is also being-other. Pure being-for-itself is absolute negation, in which the thing differentiates itself from all others and in this differentiation is for an other, that is, related to an other. In this absolute negation the thing is related to itself, and this relating to itself is the sublating of itself in that it indicates that it has its essence in the other. The relation to the other belongs essentially to being-for-itself, and it is this relation which is annihilated by the independence of pure being-for-itself. “With this, the last ‘insofar as’ that separates being-for-itself from being-for-another falls away; more properly, the object is in one and the same respect the opposite of itself: It is for itself insofar as it is for another, and it is for another insofar as it is for itself. It is for itself, reflected into itself, one; but this for itself, reflected into itself, this being one, is posited in a unity with its opposite, with its being-for-another, and hence posited only as sublated; in other words, this being-for-itself is just as inessential as that which alone was supposed to be inessential, namely, the relationship to another.”9

Thus, the object of perception suffers the same fate as the object of sense certainty, although the history of its running aground is different. The object of sense certainty, the this which is intended, proved itself to be in truth the universal. However, this universal, the what of the thing in its properties, which perception takes as its true, is now in its turn sublated. And it had to be sublated because, from the very beginning and in keeping with its origin in the sensible, this universal was not the pure self-identical universal. The universal which resulted from the absolvent interpretation of sensibility was the universal of the particular. This particular, as that to which the universal as universal is related, is preserved in the universal as its other. But with that it remains the other which exists for itself in relation to the universal. This universal is conditioned by the particular and, in keeping with this conditioning, is burdened by an opposition to the other. Hence, the universal as the object of perception (the thing) had also to split into the one of the properties and the “also” of free matter.

However, these pure determinate properties of the thing, the one and the “also,” which seem to present the quiet essence of the thing, are manifest in the constant restlessness of the reciprocal opposition or indeed conflict which resides in the essence of the thing itself. Being-for-itself as such is burdened with being-for-other. The being of the thing is basically for-itself and for the other at the same time. But perception and its reflection cannot grasp this unity, the unity of what is contradictory, in which both are essential. Perception is incapable of thinking the contradiction. Insofar as perception thinks, it thinks only so as to avoid contradiction. The principle of avoiding contradiction is precisely the fundamental law of “sound common sense.” But insofar as unity finally becomes manifest there, the result is referral to another realm—not that of perception, but of understanding. With this unity of the one and the “also,” of the for-itself and the for-other, universality, too, becomes different, a universality which is no longer conditioned by an other as something alien, but is unconditioned, absolute universality. Thus, perception, as the mode of consciousness which lies in the middle, is what first mediates to the absolute and the unconditioned.

Looking back, we now see just what perception, when it is left to itself, looks like in the light of absolvent construction. Unlike sense certainty, perception does not maintain itself in an apprehending in which it loses itself; rather, perception takes for itself the true and is thus reflected into itself. But in this reflection, perception takes its object now in this respect and now in that. The act of reflecting is guided by various ways of the “insofar as” and by different perspectives: the for-itself and the to-an-other. Whichever point of view reflection calls to for help in each case, it always works one-sidedly and separated from other possible perspectives. Reflection operates with and is guided by mere abstractions. The reflective understanding of perception seems thereby to be guided entirely by the concrete wealth of the thing and its properties, whereas basically it is operating in terms of nothing but empty partialities. Perception pretends to be the richest and most concrete thinking, but it is basically the poorest. Perception is only the appearance of understanding; it is that understanding which never tires of praising itself as “sound common sense.”

Perception, entangled in itself, is not as such penetrated for what it is by this drive to reflection. By contrast, if perception is placed in the light of absolute knowledge and grasped absolvently as a mode of knowing, then it becomes manifest that there is basically no truth in this perceiving—not no truth overall, but no truth in the radical sense that perception yields now the one and now the other as its truth. In terms of absolvence—and only so—perception and its drives can and must be designated as “sophistry.”10 The innermost essence of sophistry does not consist solely and primarily in this constant reciprocal reversal of the one-sided one into its other, its equally one-sided opposite; rather, it consists above all in the fact that this drive resists something that comes to light precisely in this very drive itself—the possible unity of what is partial and abstract in something truly concrete. Perception, or the common understanding, resists this bringing together and this attainment of pure unconditional universality as the genuine truth of consciousness. The common understanding resists the essential and actual understanding. But on the other hand, through this resistance, perception already bears witness to understanding as something higher than itself, which it is not equal to, but into which it must now be mediated through absolvence—since, in keeping with Hegel’s basic principle, nothing relative remains standing in absolute knowledge.

It should be noted that we understand the transition from perception to understanding only if we register in advance that, as a mode of knowing, perception is already placed in the perspective of absolute knowledge; only then is further advance a necessity. This progress is directed toward the third mode of consciousness: understanding.

1. II, 97, 99 [GW IX, 79, 80; Hoff., 100, 101; E.T., 77, 78].

2. II, 98 [GW IX, 80; Hoff., 100; E.T., 77].

3. II, 98 [GW IX, 80; Hoff., 101; E.T., 77].

4. Il, 86 [GW IX, 72; Hoff., 90; E.T., 68].

5. Ibid.

6. II, 85 [GW IX, 71; Hoff., 89; E.T., 67].

7. II, 87 (GW IX, 73; Hoff., 92; E.T., 69)

*[Zugehörigkeit: belonging to; Zugeeignetsein: being appropriated; Eigenschaft: property.]

8. II, 73 [GW IX, 63; Hoff., 79; E.T., 58].

9. II, 85 [GW IX, 71; Hoff., 90; E.T., 67].

10. II, 88 [GW IX, 74; Hoff., 93; E.T., 70].

1. II, 89 [GW IX, 74; Hoff., 93; E.T., 70].

2. II, 89 [GW IX, 74; Hoff., 93; E.T., 70].

3. II, 91 [GW IX, 75; Hoff., 95; E.T., 72].

4. II, 6 [GW IX, 11; Hoff., 12; E.T., 3].

5. II, 93 [GW IX, 76; Hoff., 96; E.T., 74].

6. II, 93 [GW IX, 76; Hoff., 97; E.T., 74].

7. II, 93 [GW IX, 77; Hoff., 97; E.T., 74].

8. II, 94f. [GW IX, 78; Hoff., 98; E.T., 75].

9. II, 96 [GW IX, 79; Hoff., 99; E.T., 76; Hegel’s emphasis].

10. II, 97, 99 [GW IX, 79, 80; Hoff., 100, 101; E.T., 77, 78].