
# FIRST PART

Consciousness

# Chapter One

Sense Certainty

The history of spirit happens in a movement characterized as coming to itself, a movement which shows a remarkable monotony and uniformity, often to the point of the constant application of certain specific formulae. But we should not fail to see, over against precisely such a monotony, that each stage of that history always has its own actuality. Our interpretation cannot therefore follow a rigid schema into which we would force the individual chapters each in its turn. Rather, each section demands to be thought through, interpreted, and clarified in its own way. This is so not only because each section has its own content in itself, but also because this content is in each case different, depending on the already transmitted history of the absolute spirit.

According to what we have said so far, it is clear that the first section of the Phenomenology of Spirit—“A. Consciousness”—and particularly its first part—“Sense Certainty”—demands an interpretation which is entirely peculiar to it but in which it nevertheless must then avoid losing itself. Here we must try to see whether we can succeed in awakening the inner law of the work, enabling us to attain the depth and fullness of the whole. It would be easy—or at least it is not the most difficult thing—to drag a whole profusion of historical and systematic issues into individual sentences and concepts and so shape the interpretation in such a way that the lawfulness proper to the work and its problem would disappear from view.

The first long section of the work is entitled: “A. Consciousness” and has three parts: “I. Sense certainty; or the this and intending/meaning,”* “II. Perception; or the thing and deception,” “III. Force and Understanding, appearance and the supersensible world.”

§6. Sense certainty and the immediacy

a) Immediate knowledge as the first necessary object for us who know absolutely

Hegel begins by saying: “The knowledge which is at first or is immediately our object cannot be anything else but immediate knowledge itself, a knowledge of the immediate or of a being. Our approach to the object must also be immediate or receptive; we must alter nothing in the object as it presents itself. In apprehending it, we must refrain from trying to comprehend it.”1

Hegel begins with this short passage, which succinctly outlines what “our object” is “at first”—and not just is our object, for this or that reason, but what our object must be at first (it “cannot be anything else …”). This already assigns the task of saying how this object must be our object. We are in general clear about what the overall pervasive object presented by the unfolding of the Phenomenology of Spirit is: it is knowing. That is why Hegel begins by saying: “The knowledge which is at first.…” But which knowledge? What does knowledge mean when taken formally? We “know” something when this something exists for a consciousness. For this reason Hegel says in the introduction: knowledge is the relation “of the being of something for a consciousness.”2 That knowledge and not something else is our object is not discussed further. Rather, question and answer aim at once at that knowing which “at first” must be “our object.”

In which sequence within which progression should this “at first” be understood? What the “at first” means can be determined only on the basis of this question. But Hegel himself already gives an explanation: he says, “at first or immediately.” This “or immediately” is not idly written down to crowd out the foregoing expression, but is rather its interpretation. However, what does “immediate” mean? Does it mean simply what we have before us accidentally without further ado? At times that can be a different knowing. One person is in the midst of an ethical decision, another is involved in a religious debate. One person is immersed in a work of art, the other philosophizes. One person keeps a head count, the other observes the stars in a telescope, and another drives a car. In every such case each person finds himself in a different knowing. How can one say which knowing is immediately our object? Obviously this question can never be settled in a way which is valid for everyone. But does “immediate” here mean what anyone would simply hit upon if he wanted to pinpoint knowledge in himself? The question is not about a knowing which suggests and presents itself simply to anyone. Rather, the question is about “the knowing” which must be “immediately our object.” “Our”? Who are the “we” for whom this “our” is meant—“our object,” object for us? Does the “we” refer to us who sit here and think about this or that, who now read the Phenomenology of Spirit, just as earlier we were reading a text in middle high German or a medical textbook, just as later we shall be reading Pindar or a newspaper? No. Rather, the “we” refers to those who already from the outset know absolutely and who apprehend and determine things in the manner of this knowing. The manner of this knowing is not to know relatively, not to know merely by constantly fastening precisely on what is known, but rather detaching oneself from what is known, to know the knowing of this known. It means, not to be absorbed in what is known, but to transmit it as such, as what is known to where it belongs as known and from where it stems, i.e., to transmit the known to the knowledge of it and so to know the mediation between what is known and knowledge. This is to say that this mediating knowledge itself now takes in its turn what it knows only as a means, so that with its help the mediating knowledge knows what is known more originally as such. Mediation is in its turn transmitted into the means by which the mediation knows what is its known, etc.

The object for us, our object, is the object for those who from the outset know in such a way as to comport ourselves mediatingly, in the manner of sublating that has already been characterized, a sublating which is itself the way absolute knowledge occurs and is the character of that restlessness which is the absolute and which Hegel also calls “absolute negativity” or “infinite affirmation.”3 What this means is shown in the Phenomenology of Spirit. It suffices for now to say that so far as this knowledge is concerned, the knowing attitude is never a simple affirmation or a simple obstinate denial. It is not the denial of an affirmation, or the affirmation of a denial. Rather, this attitude is what serves as the inner law of the negation of the negation.

According to what has been said, what is im-mediate for us, the mediators, is for our mediation not yet mediated. To the extent that from the outset we basically and constantly comport ourselves mediatingly, to the extent that we in principle and actually know everything as mediated or mediatable, we come across what is im-mediate only when we, who know absolutely, fail to take ourselves seriously enough, when we as it were condescend only to immediate knowledge. We do not surrender ourselves and our way of knowing by this condescension. The immediate to which we, the mediators, condescend always already stands under the dominion of mediation and sublation. The latter in turn can of course be what it is only when it condescends to what is un-mediated, precisely in order to mediate it. The im-mediate is already the im-mediated of mediation.

It thus becomes clear who the “we” are who right at the beginning say “for us.” “We” are those who know in terms of the science of absolute knowledge. From the beginning the “we” has lost the option of being this or that person and thus of being, randomly, an ego.

It is only from this perspective that we can and must ask which knowledge must at first be our object. In order to mediate absolutely, we must comport ourselves immediately, in keeping with the character of our mediation. Our non-mediation at the beginning amounts to our postponing all sublating and mediating; we comport ourselves toward knowledge absolutely relatively—receptively only—in that we do not as yet “get thought moving in manifold ways.”4 “Getting thought moving in manifold ways” does not mean thinking back and forth, but means rather the movement of absolute restlessness. To some extent this movement rests for a moment in knowing what is immediate. But it should be noted how the character and necessity of the possible first object is determined in terms of the knowledge of the knowers. It is not at all as if one were seeking some vague immediacy. Rather, the sense of the immediacy is determined from the very beginning, thus circumscribing the scope for what can and must be the first object of this knowledge. We the mediators must necessarily take as our first object that knowledge which as such is knowable in such a way as to demand on its own basis nothing else but pure apprehension. That is why the first object for us—which is knowledge as such—must be “knowledge of the immediate.”

A being is what Hegel calls this immediate as the object of that knowledge which is the immediate object for us who know absolutely. Accordingly, we have in our knowledge two objects, or one object twice. This is the case necessarily and throughout the entire Phenomenology, because for us the object is basically and always knowing, which in itself and according to its formal essence already in its turn has its object which it brings along with it. Hegel expresses this relation exactly by distinguishing the “object for us” from the “object for it”—for it, namely, for that knowing which is in each case the object for us. Insofar as the knowing which is our object is only a knowing because something is known for it, the object for this knowing belongs precisely to the object for us.

Now, the experience which consciousness undergoes with itself in the Phenomenology is just that it comes to know that the object for it is not the true object. It learns that the truth of its object lies precisely in what this object is for us—for us who know knowledge and its known already in its character as sublated, knowing it this way fundamentally although it is still under wraps. The object for it must develop through us into the object for us. Through us does not mean that as random subjects we would arbitrarily set to work on that object, but rather that from out of knowledge itself (for which it is always an object) the possibility is given to the object for it to become what it is, namely, absolute knowledge. Thus, knowledge reveals itself as that which at the time it is not and as that which in this not-being it simultaneously is in truth. Knowledge itself (as what is known in absolute knowledge) brings to light the measure by which it at any given time measures and finds its truth. But the respective measure itself then enters into knowledge as the truth for it.

However, we are still not yet entirely clear about the relations and how they become manifest, inasmuch as knowledge appears for the science and is presented by means of science, a presentation which constitutes the coming-to-itself of the science.

b) The being-in-and-for-itself of the subject-matter and the contemplation of absolute knowledge. “Absolvent” absolute knowledge

The object for us, who know the science, is always a knowledge. In this objectified knowledge lies knowledge’s own relation to its known: the object for it. However, for it, for immediate knowledge, the object is at first and immediately not yet for it, but is in itself. For it, for totally immediate knowledge, the object simply returns into itself. Or more accurately stated: The object has not yet at all gone out of itself as what stands opposed [as Gegen-stand]. It has not gone to oppose knowledge of it in order to stand opposed to this knowledge. Remaining entirely with itself, this object is a being-in-itself. The object [Gegen-stand] “stands”, but not as opposed to knowledge. Immediate knowledge in itself has just this feature and this character of knowing, that it surrenders the object entirely to itself. The object stands in itself as that which does not need to be for a consciousness. And consciousness grasps the object immediately, precisely as something invariable in itself. Thus, we have the object of the known knowledge in three ways:

1. The object in itself, as it is immediate for it (consciousness);

2. The being-for-it of the in-itself;

3. The being-for-us of what is a being-for-itself as such.

And yet what the object is as object for us is only the anticipated true for-it of the in-itself. For being-for-it is already the first step of dissolution from immediate absorption in the in-itself; it is already the mode of mediating and no longer immediate knowledge. Immediate knowledge returns to this mediating absolute knowledge. Immediate knowledge begins the return, not to something alien, but to something which exists for itself. That is why the object is known absolutely only when it is not only in-itself and not only for it (that is, for consciousness that comes to know itself in that way), but also when the for-it becomes for itself and the in-itself follows thereby—in other words, when the object is known in and for-itself.

To put it differently and at the same time to anticipate an important aspect of Hegelian terminology, we can say that being-in-itself and being-for-another “fall within that knowledge which we are investigating.”5 They fall within that knowledge insofar as we who know absolutely know it. For abstract knowledge, by contrast, they fall apart, falling out of knowledge. Hegel likes to speak of the “falling out” and the “falling in” of what seemingly falls out into the truth of absolute knowledge, a knowledge which was previously still unevolved.

Regarding the difference between that which is in itself and that which is for another—in other words, for knowledge of the former—Hegel also uses the words object, concept, and essence as technical terms. Indeed, he interchanges these terms in a way which is characteristic of the entire problematic. That which is in itself can be called object, and what is for another—what is known or knowledge—can be called concept. But being-for-another is called object—in the sense of that which stands against—and accordingly, what the object is in itself, is called its essence or its concept. In both instances we are to experience, in the Phenomenology, whether and how the object corresponds to its concept or the concept corresponds to its object. As Hegel states: “It is evident that the two cases are the same. But the essential point to retain throughout the whole investigation is that these two moments, concept and object, being-for-another and being-in-itself, both fall within that knowledge which we are investigating. Consequently, we do not need to import standards, or to make use of our ideas and thoughts during the investigation; it is precisely when we let these go that we succeed in contemplating the subject matter as it is in and for itself.”6

We let our ideas and thoughts go: we who know absolutely do not become so by taking up and taking on what is one-sided or what has been omitted. Rather, we will know absolutely when we let go. Basically, we know absolutely already and have already let go what is ours in the sense of what is relative to human beings. We are already those who know absolutely; otherwise we could never begin. We can bring the subject matter into view only if we, the contemplators, are those who know absolutely.

But, of course, this way of talking can be misunderstood. One could think that what is required here is for absolute knowledge to be present in its unfolded and developed absolute fullness. It is not the absolute fullness and its absolute presence which is required but rather the character and way in which the absolute is, the absolute restlessness of mediation, which alone can be absolutely immediate, can be relative in an absolute manner, so absolute that it is relative and, being relative, brings about its dissolution. It is precisely in showing how as absolute it is absolute, that the absolute comes to light in the Phenomenology. But in the absolute this how of being absolute is at the same time its what—the distinction between what and how (or essentia and existentia) has basically no place in the absolute. But in order to characterize the absolute specifically with regard to its being absolute, as an absolute knowing, we would like to introduce a term which expresses more precisely this manner of knowing absolutely. We shall be speaking of restless absolute knowledge as absolvent (in the sense of absolution). Then we can say that the essence of the absolute is the in-finite absolving, and therein negativity and positivity are at the same time absolute or in-finite.

We shall now try to read again the short introductory paragraph of the first part of the first major section: “The knowledge which is at first or is immediately our object cannot be anything else but immediate knowledge itself, a knowledge of the immediate or of a being. Our approach to the object must also be immediate or receptive; we must alter nothing in the object as it presents itself. In apprehending it, we must refrain from trying to comprehend it.”7

Now it is clear that if we were to try to interpret the individual sentences and paragraphs of the entire work in this manner, we would perhaps reach the end only after many years. However, we refrain from this form of interpretation, not only because we want to reach the end faster, but also because it is not necessary. On the contrary, with the step-by-step coming to itself of science, its own knowing grows and unfolds, and its inner light becomes clearer and more luminous. Of course, this does not mean that the appropriation of the work becomes increasingly easier and more evident. Just the opposite! This growing difficulty arises not from the formal aspect of the work, but from the way in which that which is to be known becomes more concrete in the manner of its being known. What does this mean? It means that the collectivity of those who know, which has been opened up, will be required to become increasingly more exacting. The commitment of the philosopher in and to philosophy can less and less be held back and obliterated by a pseudotruth.

The first object to submit to the absolvent knowing of science must of necessity do so as that knowledge which in its turn is in fact the most immediate knowledge. And this in spite of what Hegel states in the second part of A, which deals with knowing as “perception”: “the way we take in perception” (as object of absolute knowledge) “is no longer a taking in which just appears, as in sense certainty, but is a necessary one.”8 We have to understand this remark to mean in the first instance that the taking in of the first object which is exhibited in the Phenomenology is not a necessary one. On the other hand, sense certainty as the most immediate knowledge is not accidentally and arbitrarily the first object; rather, Hegel states explicitly that this knowledge “cannot be anything else” but immediate; consequently, the sense certainty must be the first object.

Thus, the taking in of sense certainty as an object is not a necessary one (cf. II, 84 [GW IX, 71; Hoff., 89; E.T., 67]), while at the same time sense certainty is necessarily the first object (cf. II, 73 [GW IX, 63; Hoff., 79; E.T., 58]). Sense certainty, in its character as an object for absolute knowledge, is necessary and yet not necessary! Or is the non-necessity which pertains to sense certainty only a non-necessity in the distinction from the specific necessity of perception? Sense certainty would not then be necessary in the manner of perception but would be necessary in its own way. In that case we would have a twofold necessity. That is indeed the way it is. But this twofold necessity is basically one and the same, by being required by absolute knowledge itself. For if this knowledge is really absolute, then in no way—not even at the beginning—can it be dependent upon the surrender of an object which is independent of this knowledge. Rather, even when it is a matter of “taking in,” this taking in must be one which takes the object absolutely and surrenders itself to the object absolutely. Perception as what necessarily comes forward—in that it emerges from out of the first sublating mediation of sense certainty—emerges from out of absolute knowledge, insofar as it is absolvent in movement. But this same necessity applies to mediation in the direction of its return to immediate knowledge, which is given over to the previously and, in retrospect, necessary mediation. The taking-in which appears is no less necessary than the transition from sense certainty to perception, only necessary in a different way. The necessity of coming forward and the necessity of taking in stem in like manner from mediation, which, mediating the immediate, allows something else to come forward necessarily which for its part, as a mediation which mediates the immediate, must have taken in something immediate with equal necessity.

Hegel begins with immediate knowledge. He must begin with it. But this beginning with the immediate is already no longer an immediate beginning. It is not only for Hegel that the beginning is not an immediate one; philosophy itself can never begin immediately, but always begins with mediation. We leave it open here what meaning the word mediation has in each case.

It has been our intention to develop extensively the problematic of the beginning with regard to Hegel, because it is otherwise impossible to find one’s way already in the first, brief part on immediate knowledge: sense certainty. For this discussion of immediate knowledge, in which we comfort ourselves purely “receptively”—receptively in Hegel’s sense—is anything but an immediate description of what is given. This discussion is not a description of that kind, not because Hegel would have been unable to offer such a description or because for some reason he would suddenly have become unfaithful to his own task, but rather because there is generally nothing like pure immediate description in philosophy. This is not to say, however, that it is impossible for philosophy to grasp the matter itself. This is quite possible. But the matter itself is not of a kind like things and living beings, which one can describe immediately. Such a seeing is immediate in that the horizon in which seeing takes place is not known but is simply there. But when what is at stake is the matter of philosophy—in this case, spirit, or absolute actuality—then it would require a most original adherence to the matter. If the matter itself in philosophy is not evident to those who just happen to run into it, that is no objection against philosophy. Indeed, we read again and again in Hegel that, in following and following up the phenomenology of spirit, we should only “look on,” not adding anything, but only taking and receiving what we find there. This is indeed the way it is. But the question is: What is this “looking on”? This looking on is not an indeterminate, arbitrary, unprepared staring, guided by whims, but is a looking on within the attitude of undergoing an experience, the way this experience sees. This looking on is a looking with the eyes of absolute knowledge.

The structure of each part—and particularly the structure of the first part—shows how little it is a matter of immediate description. With what does Hegel begin the real presentation of sense certainty? With two paragraphs up to II, 74 [Hoff., 80; GW IX, 63; E.T., 59], which anticipate the entire problematic and the result. This happens not only because it is proper to give an arrangement of the thought sequence to come, but also because the disposition should explicitly be created in which we are disposed to the openness of the gaze, which should subsequently look on.

c) The immediacy of the object and of the knowing of sense certainty. “Pure being” and extantness

What along with Hegel we call sense certainty appears as a cognition. We are not told further what this cognition is, but what is understood thereby is the way in which something becomes manifest according to some specific point of view as to what it is and how it is. Every cognition—and that includes sense certainty—has its truth. It follows from this that Hegel does not use the expression “certainty” in order to designate its character as somehow equivalent to the truth of cognition. Rather, in every instance certainty means the entirety of the relation, in knowing, of a knower to what is known, the unity of knowing and what is known, the manner of being known and consciousness in the broadest sense of knowing and cognition.

Furthermore, it is worth noting right at the beginning that with regard to sense certainty, Hegel offers a short essay on sense certainty without even mentioning anything about the senses, let alone the sense organs. He does speak about seeing and hearing,9 but not about the eyes, not to mention the retina, and the nervous system. He says nothing about ears and the labyrinth of the ears—none of that is there. We do not even learn anything about visual and auditory sensations, about the data of smell and touch (the very least that today’s phenomenologists would demand). And yet Hegel offers an interpretation of sensibility which is unequaled in the history of philosophy. We could of course cut this short essay into pieces and for each piece quote something analogous and similar-sounding from somewhere in the history of philosophy, from Kant to Plato. But doing so, we would only provide proof that, as long as we subscribe to such exact principles of interpretation, (1) we do not want to understand anything of Hegel himself, and (2) we cannot do so. What is unprecedented about Hegel’s interpretation of sensibility is that he understands it entirely in terms of spirit and in spirit—as shown in the very posing of the problem. It is in spirit and for spirit that sensibility appears. Thus, this is the only way to grasp how Hegel captures the appearance of sense certainty.

Sense certainty appears—as the “richest” as well as the “truest” cognition. It has the greatest richness and the highest truth. This is the way sense certainty appears. And yet we know in advance that, basically, this sense certainty is the poorest and is that which has the least truth. But sense certainty appears initially as the richest and the truest—and we must pursue this appearing. This twofold designation pertains to what is known in sense certainty, the content, as well as to how this certainty, in knowing, has its known.

According to its content, sense certainty appears to be the richest, so rich that its fullness has no end—a richness without end. (How this richness belongs to sense certainty and whether this richness belongs to it at all are questions which are left open.) This richness is “extended.” The dimensions of its extension are space and time. I, like everyone else, see this lectern, this bench, this window, this blackboard, and so on through the whole university building, out on the streets, in individual houses, even throughout the whole city, the environment; I see this tree and this blade of grass and this and that without end “out there” among the whole range of what is extant. And at the same time I see this lectern, this section covered by the notebook, this edge and from this edge again a short span, then I see a finger breadth and so on all the way to the smallest—so again everything else which is stretched out in the whole range of space—by “going into” the narrowness of what gets increasingly narrowed. Correspondingly, that is the way it is with time.

Going beyond every point in time and space, sense certainty follows the broadening of breadth and the narrowing of the narrow. Sense certainty is always situated somewhere in breadth and narrowness—not fixed, but with the possibility of broadening and narrowing. Nevertheless, it is always situated such that, wherever sense certainty turns its gaze, it has this here and this now before itself.

Likewise, space itself wherein this thing stands here is this space; time itself wherein this tone now sounds is this time. That is how it stands with what is known, with the content of sense certainty.

And what about the mode of knowing of sense certainty? This is the mode of pure having something before itself. In what sense? Not as if we would all at once place ourselves before the whole richness of the broad and narrow and would mean that richness, but rather that this is always before me in that I encounter this and nothing else; this and only this, with regard to which it is always so as if it is everything there is—this, that I would only need to encounter in order for me to have it right in front of me in its total “completeness.” I only meet with it; I do not trouble myself with it at all, not even so that I would leave out something thereby. I take this in its entirety as it is, as it lies in full meeting view and as it is first tangibly extant before the hand in the meeting. This is this, and that means: it is and is just it, and nothing further.

Sense certainty has thereby expressed itself—whether in actual utterance or in that silent speaking which inheres in sensuous knowing—when I intend a this. Sense certainty has expressed itself—itself! This means that the knowing of what is known is expressed—how it is something which is known—as well as what is known itself. But—and it is decisive to pay heed to that, here already—sense certainty expresses itself by stating something about what is its known. What is is stated, just as it is in truth. What is stated is the truth, and vice versa. It is not as if truth is stated only in passing. Rather, truth is in itself what is stated: the proposition. The truth of sense certainty is always this being [dieses Seiende] which sense certainty means; and sense certainty means it, this, as what is extant; it means it, this, which is. The “is” is the statement and the truth of sense certainty. Sense certainty states the extantness of what is extant, or to put it in Hegel’s terminology, it states being [Sein]. That is why Hegel says “the truth {of sense certainty} contains nothing but the being of the matter.”10 Hegel does not say that the truth of sense certainty contains the being of the matter, but rather “nothing but the being of the matter.” Sense certainty expresses itself by expressing itself regarding its matter, this extant thing. Doing so, sense certainty does not state anything further about itself, a knower and its knowing. For the truth of sense certainty is not concerned with the knower, “consciousness,” or the “I.” It is in sense certainty’s own interest that by always meaning this, which is, sense certainty does not take—and also does not need to take—an interest in itself. For sense certainty this is because it is, and for this knowing there is nowhere an authority which could be asked why this being is. Rather, it is only because it is. The being is what is extant and nothing more.

Sense certainty is as little interested in itself as knowing as it is in the this as object. Being oblivious of the object, sense certainty means only the this. As the knower I am certain only of being the knower who knows: I, this knower. But this knower does not mean anything more regarding this knowing. In sense knowledge I who know am nothing more than the pure knowing of its known, of the this that is. Therefore, here, too, Hegel says: “Consciousness for its part is in this certainty only as a pure I; or I am therein only as a pure this, …”11 Hegel does not say that consciousness is the I, but “only” I, this, just as earlier he had said about the object; what is, and “nothing but” that.

By trying to grasp sense certainty as it appears in its appearing, Hegel speaks in restrictive terms—in this “nothing but” and “only”—thus setting everything else outside the limit. And what is “everything else” which sense certainty is not yet? Taken as a mode of knowing, sense certainty is not yet something that moves thought in various ways and that unfolds itself. Knowing is not involved in any movement appropriate to knowing. Nothing further transpires in it, and it still has no history. In terms of its subject matter, sense certainty is nothing that is known, which as such has an abundance of “various properties.” This means that in both respects sense certainty does not yet show any mediation; this is still disregarded. That is why sense certainty is only what is not mediated, what is im-mediate. Sense certainty does itself appear when it so appears. But it appears in the light of a gaze which takes sense certainty only immediately, disregarding all mediating sight, which already belongs to that gaze. Otherwise this gaze could not look on and observe and see only what is immediate in its immediacy. Therefore, our way of looking on up until now was a looking on which disregards [absehendes Zusehen].

This is in keeping with the characterization which Hegel, and we with him, offer of the truth of sense certainty: “But this {sense} certainty proves itself indeed to be the most abstract and the poorest truth.”12 But here Hegel specifically stresses that it is sense certainty which proves itself as this kind of truth. To be sure, sense certainty says what is true for it: it is the extant, precisely as extant. But what sense certainty here lays out as its truth is not what shows sense certainty as such to be the most abstract and poorest truth. Sense certainty itself is not at all capable of grasping itself as abstract knowing. But that sense certainty is the “most abstract” and “poorest” truth is what we are saying as those who are in and for absolute knowledge, which “indeed” and “in truth” is true knowledge. For this knowledge (absolvent knowledge) what is known by the senses is altogether a one-sided knowing, stuck one-sidedly in a single relation, most relative, most abstract, and most one-sided. But what such a knowing is is known least of all by abstract knowing, which knows the least about itself as such. In his later period in Berlin, Hegel wrote a short essay entitled “Who Thinks Abstractly?”13 “Who thinks abstractly? The uneducated, not the educated man.”14

We have already emphasized that the truth which sense certainty states about its object is the truth which it articulates itself. Consequently, this truth is also the truth which certainty as knowledge (as a knowing relation to …) is. In truth this relation is also only one of pure being-extant, its merely extant character: “pure being, which constitutes the essence of this certainty and which this certainty pronounces as its truth”15—its truth, what this certainty in its entirety is. Sensuous knowledge as self-relation is also only being-extant, because this knowledge, merely let loose toward the extant and absorbed in it, is only extant—and not even as extant as its object itself is.

The object of sense certainty and the knowledge of this object have now been characterized. The result of this characterization is that, according to both moments, the essence of sense certainty is immediacy.

However, with this result the presentation of sense certainty is not at an end—so far from it that it can only now begin. For the presentation must be carried out from the experience which absolvent knowledge undergoes with consciousness. This absolvent knowledge has in the above characterization of its immediate object—namely, of sense certainty—not yet gone beyond the initial reception of what appears. Our primary task now is to examine how things stand with sense certainty. Have we actually surveyed the pure immediacy of sense certainty—have we remained in it—in order to grasp it in what it knows and how it knows it? It will become apparent that several approaches are necessary for that—one approach preparing the way for the other.

d) Distinctions and mediation in the pure being of what is immediate in sense certainty. The multiplicity of examples of the this and the this as I and as object

“When we look on,” we see at once that we cannot stop at “pure being,” the extant character of the sensible object and its knowledge. For “with this pure being … much more is in play besides.”16 What is “in play besides” shows itself when we actually turn an actual sense certainty into an object. Let us try it. Each one of us should do it and should place himself in what he has immediately before himself, a this. Let us say “this,” the lectern here. I discover that I mean this here as something extant and that—as the one who knows about it in a knowledge of it—I, this, am. What else is in play? Each one of us has before himself a this. Of course, that is nothing different from what was said earlier, namely, that the object of sense certainty is the this. The this? But our object is this lectern, and if we look further, this blackboard, this door. Thus, each time we have another this, and each time we have looked in this or in that direction. Each time the this is a lectern, a door, a tree, its branch, a twig, a leaf. Each time there is an actual this, and “the this” itself is precisely not the object of sensible knowing. When we generally intend the this, we find that “this” sends our intention away. It sends our intention away, not generally, but rather in the definite direction of something which has the character of a being this: a lectern, a window, a piece of chalk. Because the particular this, in accord with its own import, has in itself the character of being a this, therefore the particular this is not the immediate object.

Hence, it follows that actual sense certainty is never merely this sheer immediacy that we take it to be, but rather each actual sense certainty is an example—is indeed an example in an essential sense. In what way? If, for example, we imagine a tree in a general way, then a fir, a beech, an oak, or a linden—and any other tree—is an example of it. But actual sense certainty is not only in this sense an example [Beispiel] for that which we initially determine as its essence; there are no isolated cases each of which could be brought at random as an example and then “subsumed” under the general concept. Rather, the actual sense certainty as actual is in each case in itself an example. For to the extent that sense certainty refers to and means this and to the extent that the this has the character of being a this, to that extent every act of “meaning this” is in itself exemplifying. Every actual sense certainty as such is an example, a by-play [Bei-spiel]. The act of intending [meinen], which refers to the this, lets its character as being a this be exemplified in and through the this in each instance. Here we must take into consideration that the lectern, the blackboard, and the door are as such not examples of the this, but examples of objects of use: Only as having the possibility of being a this are they all in each instance a this. But what do we mean by having the possibility of being a this? We cannot yet answer this question. At this point we can only say that meaning is in itself exemplifying. By contrast, the lectern in its being a lectern is not an example.

Pure being, the true immediacy, is therefore a sense certainty which in each case exemplifies. The “I” too is in each case exemplified just as the this, which has the character of being a this [das Diesige].* Thus, we see that what we took earlier to be already the essence of sense certainty—the this as object and a this as I—both have already fallen out of pure being. Both are differentiated, and both constitute a difference which has to be addressed as a “principal difference.” As long as we are guided by what has fallen out of pure being, we do not have the immediate in its immediacy. It is also just as obvious that this falling out has happened to us. It is clear that the this as object and the this as I could fall out of pure being only because as the principal difference they are in the end already in the essence of sense certainty, in immediacy. Furthermore, if we not only look at this difference but also reflect on it, then we come to the conclusion that both—the differentiated—are not simply extant in essence, but the one is through the other and vice versa. I have certainty through the matter at hand [Sache], and the matter at hand is certain only through the I who knows. Both of the differentiated are mediated and reside with this mediation in the essence of what is immediate. But the question to which our observations have come so far has not been asked: Can we stop at immediacy as the truth of sense certainty? Are we not stating exactly what sense certainty is not? Are we not contradicting the essence of sense certainty when we address it thus?

Let us keep in mind that, after the initial determination of the essence of sense certainty, we have now looked closely.** We have reflected on what came to light through this looking; we have reflected on the difference between the “this” and the “I intend,” the difference between pure being and what is in play besides. At the same time and by means of this distinction, there arises explicitly the difference between essence and example.

e) The experience of the difference between immediacy and mediation. What is essential and not essential in sense certainty itself. The this as the essence, its significance as now and here, and the universal as the essence of the this

We make the distinction between the essence and the example, between immediacy and mediation. But Hegel says explicitly: “It is not just we who make this distinction … rather, we find it within sense certainty itself.”17 It is not that we do not make this distinction at all, merely finding it, as we might find a knife in the street, something which we certainly did not make. Hegel is not saying that we do not make this distinction, merely finding it. Rather, he says: “It is not just we who make the distinction.…” Certainly we make this distinction, we must make this distinction, nay we must have already made this distinction in order to be able to find it. Indeed, we have already made the distinction between immediacy and mediation, because this distinction and its making is nothing else than the basic character of our comportment in absolvent knowing. Whatever is to encounter us there is from the beginning seen by us in the brightness of the light of this difference. It should encounter us; we should look carefully to see how that which encounters us shows itself in this light, how it itself carries this difference in itself. That is why Hegel says: “It {the distinction between immediacy and mediation} is to be taken up in the form in which it is present {in sense certainty} not as we have just defined it.”18 It is already quite clear here how in the process of absolution we go—explicitly, though not with complete specificity—one step beyond the phenomenon in Hegel’s sense and, as it were, bring the phenomenon to light in order then first and foremost in the light to go to and to go back to the phenomenon. If we have already illuminated this light in the right way, then this way must lead us to what is true. That means that the elucidation of sense certainty as it is in itself must confirm what we said about it by way of anticipation. Our anticipatory and absolvent knowing must prove itself by coming to its own truth [bewahrheiten]. In this manner consciousness itself must come one step closer to its truth. Now our absolvent gaze is enlightened—with reference to what appears—in order to see.

In what form do we find in sense certainty the difference between essence and instance, between immediacy and mediation?

Only now does phenomenology actually begin to happen. We are to undergo an experience with sense certainty. For this it is necessary to take sense certainty as it offers itself in itself. Sense certainty offers itself in general as certainty, as a knowledge of something known. If we wish to gather up this phenomenon in its entirety, we should follow this phenomenon as it is. Sense certainty is a knowing relation to.… Consequently, we dare not see “this relation to … externally, as it were, like a band that entwines an I who knows and an object which is known. Rather, it is a matter of going along with knowledge and of gathering up that to which knowledge is knowingly related and how knowledge does so. In this respect, we already heard that for sense certainty, in accord with its manner of knowing, the object is what exists or that which is—what by itself remains extant even if it is not known. Knowing, and along with it the I who knows, is of no importance for the object as it is in itself. Sense certainty knows this and gives expression to it in that for and in sense certainty as a whole only the object is “what is true and the essence.”19 Knowing can also not be; both knowing and the I are all the same to the essence—they are un-essential. When there is knowledge, it is always in reference to the object. This is what sense certainty itself says. In this statement sense certainty says how, according to its saying, it carries in itself the difference between essence and what is un-essential.

Sense certainty lays out the object, the being in itself, as its truth. But is the object “in fact” extant in sense certainty as sense certainty announces it to be? Again the question emerges whether the object is “in fact” or in truth such. (In accordance with what truth? In accordance with the truth which from the beginning sets the measure for us who know absolutely.)

How are we to answer this question? How are we to decide whether the object of sense certainty, as this object is laid out to be by and for sense certainty, corresponds to the object which in truth is extant in sense certainty? Completely apart from how this question will be decided, with it the possibility is already indicated of a correspondence or a non-correspondence between the object as it is for sensible knowledge (the object for it) and the genuine truth of this object (the object for us).

The object for sense certainty is the this. So we ask sense certainty itself: What does the this mean to sense certainty? In what does the this-ness of the this consist for sense certainty? What does sense certainty say if it is interrogated, really interrogated in each actual case, as to what the “this” is? What does the this-ness of this window mean to sense certainty? That it is the window here. Or the this-ness of this pulse-beat? That it is this now. Here and now make up the this-ness of a this. What is the now? What should sense certainty say about the now? What is there for sense certainty to say about the now other than to say what the now immediately is—with reference to the being which just now makes up the now? The now is just this afternoon, “now” it is afternoon.* Or considering the now, the now was, just as Hegel was interrogating sense certainty about the now, when he wrote the text: the now is night.

“Now” is afternoon. This is an incontestable truth. We preserve this truth by writing it in chalk on the blackboard. When the janitor comes to the lecture hall early tomorrow morning at eight o’clock, to see if everything is all right and if the blackboard is clean, and he reads the sentence “Now is afternoon,” then he will not admit at any price that the sentence is true. Overnight the sentence has become false: The being which was the now, the now which from what was regarded as morning by the janitor was yesterday afternoon, is for a long time already no longer in being. It has no permanence. But “now,” when the janitor reads the sentence, is also “now.” However, “now” the now is morning. But since it does happen that professors make mistakes, and on the other hand the janitor also belongs to the university, he will in this case lend a hand and correct the sentence. He writes “now” the truth which he will defend at all cost: Now is morning. At one o’clock the janitor comes to the lecture hall and sees his truth standing there. Truth? “Now” is midday.

Which is then “now” actually true or in being? Each time it is “now,” and each now is “now” already other, no longer what it was earlier. The now remains constant and is “now” each time in each given moment. But how does the now remain the now, and as what does it remain? The now remains the now in that what is the now in each case—morning, noon, afternoon, evening, night—is in each case not. The now is always not-this. This not always removes the immediate this—night, day—whatever happens to be the now. What is immediate is sublated, mediated. In order for the now to be able to remain the now that is, this constant negation belongs to the now. But how interesting that this constant sublation, this continuous change, does not disturb the now at all. It remains simply now and remains simply indifferent to what it is “now,” be it day or night. As simple as this or as that, it is, however, never only this or exclusively that. This simple which is permanent in and through mediation is the “universal.”

The question was: What is the this, or what constitutes this-ness? The answer: The now. And what is the essence of the now? The universal just arrived at. This universal is the truth of the this, the truth of the object of sense certainty.

The same is true for the other “form” of the this: the here. To the question “What is here?” sense certainty, which we in each case interrogate about its object, replies by saying “Here, the lectern.” “I turn around”20 and the truth disappears: the here is not the lectern but the blackboard. It is invariably that way: wherever I turn and wherever I am, I see a here. I always take the here with me. Wherever I stand, the where is already turned into a here. To put it more exactly: the here first makes possible the where as the there which we interrogate from the here. The here remains, but what has the character of a here is in each case something else. And although the existing here requires each time something that definitely has the character of a here, yet it is at the same time entirely indifferent as to which one it is. The here is not troubled whether what has the character of a here is a tree, a bridge, the summit of a mountain, or the bottom of the sea. The here requires only that it is in each case something with the character of a here. But by requiring something like this, the here never turns directly to that which has the character of the this, which in each case is something with the character of the here. The here requires that which has the character of the here, while at the same time it discards it as this in each case. Just as with the now, the here remains the empty and indifferent here, mediated simplicity, i.e., universality. Thus, this determinateness of the this-ness also proves to be a universal.

f) Language as the expression of what is universal and the singular item which is intended—the ontological difference and dialectic

What is the this? What is it that is the object—the true and the being—for sense certainty? The this is a universal. But actual sense certainty does not mean the universal this. Of course not. Actual sense certainty means that which in each case has the character of the this, precisely that which sense certainty exemplifies: this tree, this house, this night. But what is exemplified is always and everywhere something else, never the same thing in every time and every place; it is something of the nature of a nothing [Nichtiges]. What sense certainty intends [meint] in exemplification, what sense certainty takes as a being by intending it, is a non-being, that which “does not continue existing.”21 The being is what continues existing, what is unaffected by change and disappearance, unaffected by the not. The being is the true.

By way of anticipation, we said at the beginning of this discussion that sense certainty expresses itself, sense certainty states its truth. Only now do we understand what that means. We say: This. What we say here is the universal this, and what we intend is what has the character of the this, namely, a tree. What we actually intend by the universal this we cannot say at all with the this. We say “this,” and the result is the universal this. Language says the opposite of what we mean. We mean the singular item; language says the universal. But language not only says with obstinacy the opposite opinion, but also says what is true, because language always already says the universal. Language repudiates our intention. But language does not only repudiate us: language also turns into its opposite what is initially intended, what is supposedly true. Language allows us to experience that intention means nothing and to experience what really is true according to sense certainty. Language forces things into their opposites, sublates them, raises them to genuine truth. Language is in itself mediating; it prevents us from sinking into that which has the character of the this—that which is totally one-sided, relative, and abstract. By turning things into their opposites, language brings about the turning away from what is relative. That is why, at the crucial conclusion of the discussion on sense certainty, Hegel says that language has “the divine nature of immediately perverting the intention.”22 Language has a divine, absolute essence. Language has in it something of the essence of God, the absolute—what is nonrelative—the absolute, or the absolvent. Language is divine because language is absolvent, because language detaches us from one-sidedness and allows us to state what is universal and true. Thus, man, to whose exsistence* language belongs, has access to what he means when he refers to “something this-like” only through the character of the this itself and through the this. More precisely: We intend “something this-like” only because we have access to a this. We can only intend because we “speak.” This furthest externalization exists only in the nearest internalization [Erinnerung] of language. The definition of man from antiquity as ζῷον λογον ἔχον corresponds to this. In the Phenomenology of Spirit we shall again and again come across the basic essence of language as that which constitutes the existence of the self as self.23

What is stated about language is true precisely for the statement which sense certainty makes about its object when sense certainty states: The this is. We mean this particular individual entity and say of it, “it is”; thus, we state and articulate “being in general.” Hegel explicitly emphasizes: “Of course, we do not represent the universal this or being in general, but we express the universal.”24 And yet we must say that we express the universal only because, although not thematized, being in general is stated by us; and being is stated by us only because being is already understood by us. When in sense certainty we intend this being, it is not as if being is understood in advance only in a general way. Rather, we could never intend a being if being were not already the true, that is: manifest. Only on the basis of this truth does there “emerge” in a specific sense possible truth, the manifestness of what is intended, insofar as we can speak at all of the truth of the latter—which is not at all the case for Hegel. Rather, the truth of the this is the universal, but this truth is not grasped and taken in itself by sense certainty. That is, this truth is not yet perception.

This brief reference to the understanding of being and its connection with the manifestness of beings (with ontic truth) is inserted here peripherally, in order to remember that in Hegel’s problematic we are not confronted with an abstruse and arbitrary speculation. At the same time, in dealing with the problematic of the understanding of being, we are not dealing with a contrived amusement that might be taken as indicative of a particular point of view. In all of this there is only a simple and magnificent resonance of the question of philosophy: τί τό ὄν. But precisely on this account, our task is to grasp the most inner direction of the Hegelian problem by letting it take its own course and following it. And because following this direction involves a confrontation [with Hegel], the question arises as to whether this understanding and speaking of being, or language, is divine in the sense of being absolute. We can also put it this way: Is the understanding of being absolvent, and is the absolvent absolute? Or is what Hegel represents in the Phenomenology of Spirit as absolvence merely transcendence in disguise, i.e., finitude? Our confrontation with Hegel arrives at this crossing which is located between finitude and infinity, as crossroads, which is not the same as the opposition of two points of view.

However obvious and easy it is to bring up the problematic of the “ontological difference” in relation to Hegel’s remarks on the expressing of the universal and the understanding of being (being in our broad sense, for Hegel no longer calls this “being”) as one intends beings, the questions stand quite differently for Hegel. For Hegel, as the completion of Western metaphysics, the entire dimension of the problem of being is oriented toward the λόγος. But for Hegel λέγειν is not the simple proposition or one-sided general statement “S is P.” Rather, λέγειν has already become διαλέγεσθαι. This means two things. (1) It means a διά, speaking “through,” a movement which lies specifically in speaking and knowing itself, the restlessness of the absolute, not a halting but rather sublating, the Platonic διαλέγεσθαι: a passing through. (2)* But it is not simply a passing through. Rather, there is a speaking to itself in διαλέγεσθαι as the medium. This is already the case with Plato, although dialectic is fundamentally different for Plato and for Hegel. What is spoken is oriented toward itself. The truth of what is spoken ultimately lies in the I, the subject, or spirit. This does not really become prominent in Western dialectic, but dialectic is nothing other than absolvence which is conceived on the basis of the logos, which is “logical” in the original sense. Hegel’s philosophy (method) is dialectic: (1) the problem of being remains oriented to λόγος, and (2) this “logical” orientation is restlessness and is absolvent, understood in terms of in-finity.

Hegel and to a certain extent already Fichte see “the conflict of the form of a proposition”25: “What has already been said can be expressed formally: the nature of the judgment or proposition, which involves the distinction between subject and predicate, is destroyed by the speculative proposition; and the proposition of identity, which the former becomes, contains the counter-thrust against that subject-predicate relationship.”26 But in speculative “philosophical” propositions, the simple difference between subject and predicate is not abolished through identity, but rather is sublated. This is the absolvent proposition. In the proposition “is” is stated. Hegel brings the absolute restlessness of absolvence into this quiet “is” of the general proposition. The whole work of his philosophy is devoted solely to making this restlessness real.

§7. Mediatedness as the essence of what is immediate and the dialectical movement

a) Intention as the essence of sense certainty. The singularity and universality of intending

The course of the discussion so far has been the following: We interrogated sense certainty regarding what it says about its object and thereby about itself. Sense certainty states that the object is the being which exists in itself and is the true, the essential; for the object exists even if knowledge does not. And this knowledge, which does not need to exist, can exist only when the object exists. The object is what is essential; the knowledge of the object (intending the object) is inessential. A closer examination of what the “this” as object is reveals that this object, the singular “this,” is not at all what lasts, but is what constantly changes. What thus changes is indifferent and inessential when compared with what lasts, with the now and the here. The object is not the true as the in-itself, but rather is in each case only the “intended” object insofar as the object is my object, insofar as the object is taken into meaning by me, by the I who knows—insofar as the object encounters the now and the here in the form of the this. The object exists because I, this I, know it. Thus, everything is reversed. What was formerly inessential and indifferent—knowledge and the I who knows—is now what is essential. The truth of sense certainty is detached from its object; this truth is expelled from that place and has settled itself in knowledge, in the “I know.” This truth is indeed expelled and expellable from there because this truth was found and grasped in sense certainty only presumptuously, namely, in the presumption of sense certainty, in what sense certainty, lost to itself, is in its immediacy.

It is worth noting that this detachment and expulsion and forcing back into the “I know” did not happen because of our arbitrary machinations; they happened in that it was shown that and how sense certainty contradicts itself, because, in saying something about itself, sense certainty speaks against what it intends, and vice versa.

However, right at the beginning, in this first act of the expulsion of the truth of sense certainty from its object, we must see how sense certainty immediately takes the direction of the “I know,” of the knower and knowledge. We must see in this first act an initial, as yet completely remote as well as short-lived, return of consciousness to itself—the first beginning of the phenomenology of spirit, as it were, on the most extreme margins of its aloofness [Abseitigkeit] and one-sidedness [Einseitigkeit], where the absolute restlessness startles the this and the intending, as it were, and now no longer leaves them at rest. For the matter cannot end with the truth of sense certainty’s pulling itself back from its this to intending. That is why Hegel says: “Sense certainty, then, though indeed expelled from the object, is not yet thereby sublated, but only driven back into the I. We now have to see what experience shows us about this (its) reality.”1 This last sentence must be taken in its entire methodological bearing; and, according to what we said earlier, we do not have to deal with it extensively.

Experience is absolvent self-releasement into what appears in the light of absolute knowledge. This experience shows something to “us,” but not as those who happen to be alive and are registered as students or employed as teachers at this university. Rather, this experience shows something to us who know absolvently, who are actual in spirit. Experience is to show us something about the reality of sense certainty, about what sense certainty truly is. In experiencing the absolute, the question is always already about the essence. To undergo an experience means to look at and follow what remains in the presence of the grinding away of the absolvent. Here, then, one must initially inquire whether in truth the reality of sense certainty is the “intention” and not the “this.”

“The force of its truth {the truth of sense certainty} thus lies now in the ‘I,’ in the immediacy of my seeing, hearing, and so on.”2 Is sense certainty true by virtue of the activity of intending, by virtue of the fact that I grasp as mine what is seen and heard in sensibility and take both into my seeing and hearing? For Hegel “intending” does not signify so much being directed at what is intended as “to take up into the intention,” i.e., receiving, taking back into the receiver what is received—recipere. Since in seeing and hearing, each I “intends” and takes into its own only what it has seen, each I comports itself quite immediately, without letting itself be disturbed by anything other than what is seen. And that is what it should do: being immediately devoted to this, to intend only this [what is seen]. The immediacy of sense certainty, which we call immediate knowledge, lies in intending. Thus, we went astray when we sought the immediacy in the object of intending; for the object of intending is only what is intended. Each I intends what is its own, and what is intended is what is its this. I, this, affirm the lectern as the here; the engineer in the railway station affirms the engine as the here—and so does each person and every I affirm, with the same right and in the same manner of verification, namely, by appealing to the fact that, immediately and without further ado, the I takes only its own. The engineer would declare someone insane who would tell him that the here is the lectern; he would say that the fellow had lost his senses and has no sense for taking as his own what is immediate in intending. To an even lesser extent can I say that the here is the Feldberg; I cannot say it because in intending I do not come across the Feldberg at all—across this as little as across anything else. In the activity of intending [im Meinen], in the sense appropriate to it, I reflect only on what is mine [des Meine].

If we pay attention—as we did above—to what is the engineer’s and to what is mine here, then we have already stepped out of intending. We are no longer in the activity of purely letting-it-be-for-it [reines Für-es-sein-lassen]. Insofar as we compare this intending with that intending, we see that each is true and that each is true in the same way and verified like any other. But precisely because each is true with the same right and in the same manner as any other, none can claim a priority over the other. On the contrary, each intending denies the rights of the other with equal right. They mutually destroy each other and force each other to disappear. They do this by contributing—each intending for itself in each case—to the building of a manifold. If, as it happens, we look at this silent war of each intending against every other, then we find that in this war the intendings wipe each other out. But insofar as this disappearance is just what it is, something remains. What is manifold, the many of the singular intending and of the singular I’s, this manifold is what disappears; and what is simple is what lasts. What is simple is that which does not let itself be pulled away into the manifold; what is simple is that which is the simple intending in each singular “I intend” and is the I in each singular “I intend.” When I say “I,” I admittedly intend myself and only myself. But when I say “I,” I say something which everyone else can say, because everyone else is an I. Everyone is that which I say when I say “I.” That which everyone is, this simple thing, does not lie immediately in every intending. Rather, everyone is immediately in every case everyone—a manifold.

That which is simple exists for us only when we pull back from the manifold, when we look carefully to see what remains when the manifold forces itself to disappear. When we keep an eye on what disappears and look upon and follow what lasts, we comport ourselves as mediating between both: When we mediate, we find what is simple. The I and the intending—this universal, wherein we presumed the force of the truth of sense certainty to be—is also nothing immediate.

b) The immediacy of sense certainty as non-differentiation of I and object. The demonstrated singular now in its movement toward the universal

What is the outcome of the preceding discussion? The immediacy of sense certainty consists neither in the immediacy of the this nor in the immediacy of intending. Neither of these moments of sense certainty is exclusively and explicitly what is immediate: neither the object in itself nor intending for itself. The immediacy of sense certainty is the immediacy in and for itself. Both together make up what is immediate. What does this say about the right way to understand the essence of sense certainty?

Object and intending together mean that sense certainty as a whole knowing does not admit into itself any opposition between object and modes of knowing. In and for itself, sense certainty not only does not allow such opposition to come forth, but also has no inner motive for evoking such an opposition, much less a motive for placing its immediacy in one or the other. Sense certainty is totally immersed in immediacy and absorbs it completely into itself and itself into it. Sense certainty as a whole holds on to itself as immediacy. What sense certainty is as a whole must be taken as its essence. Sense certainty has already miscarried if we take the object to be essential and take intending to be inessential, and vice versa. For sense certainty this distinction does not exist at all. In itself sense certainty asserts itself to be the unchanging relation, admitting of no distinction, between I and object, wherein the poles of the relation as well as the relation itself are undifferentiated and not distinguished. Nothing is yet separated; nothing has moved beyond itself or toward itself. Rather, everything is completely ingrained in what in each case has the character of a this—to such an extent that the this is not yet differentiated as object in opposition to a mode of knowing and having.

According to its own inclination, sense certainty is only inclined in such a way that it reflects on its this. By intending what is mine, my “this,” my this here, everything to which I am inclined is fulfilled. In this intending there is just no provocation for moving beyond it, in order to make it still better, as it were. Sense certainty has no motive at all for surrendering what it is for the time being. On the contrary, sense certainty is inclined to do only one thing, namely, to understand itself with regard to what is intended in sense certainty. I, this one for whom the lectern is the here—I, this one who intends—“do not turn around”3 so that the here for me would become a not-lectern. Neither do I “take notice of”4 the fact that the here can be an engine; I do not at all compare various heres and nows. Rather, this (my) intending is, in accord with its most proper inclination, a staying with what I intend. It is the same with the earlier example: the janitor who in the morning reads on the blackboard “Now is afternoon” simply insists that “now” is forenoon, if he is really intending—and he will insist that it is forenoon precisely when he is asked what is “now.”

Thus, if we said, over against a sense certainty that was earlier shown to us, that “the now is not day but night,” then sense certainty would not get involved at all with this question, provided that sense certainty is really taken as what is immediate, which it has now turned out to be. In the preceding case our observation did not allow sense certainty to stand in its immediacy, but rather forced it to become something which it is not. By forcing sense certainty into something that is for us, we have perverted it.

Thus, all that remains is to “step into” sense certainty and to let what the now and the here is be manifest and said only by sense certainty. We must retain the now that is at issue in the intending and not contrast it “afterwards” with another now. To the same extent, we must not give up the here and bring another one to the fore “at a distance from it.”

It is precisely when our looking on is mediated and when we search for immediacy that we are led to see that we have not yet taken full and appropriate account of immediacy. What matters to us just now is to take seriously the immediacy of what is immediate and to allow its own truth to establish itself. We are called upon to turn wholly and solely to this I, to remain wholly immersed in intending a this and in this immersion to let ourselves be shown what the now itself is here. We undertake a final approach in order to grasp immediately what is immediate.

“The now gets shown; this now. Now.”5 It is noteworthy that we are no longer concerned with whether the now is day or night; the now is not meant as a point in time, but as the now itself in itself. “Now.” What is the now? In saying “now,” it is already past. It belongs to the now no longer to exist even as it exists. Thus, the now is what has already been. But as what has been, the now does not have the truth of being: “… what essentially has been is, in fact, not an essence that is”6; it has no constant presence. The now is not, and yet it was with its being that we were concerned.

In this way we have taken the now just as it itself required. And what happened thereby? We simply grasped the now, and unawares we grasped the no-longer now and arrived at the truth that the now has been. In saying that the now as something which has been is no longer, we sublated this second truth, too—stating with this second sublation what the now is, namely: the now is not what is immediately simple but rather something that is reflected in itself. The now is something simple that remains what it is in its being other. The now is what is absolutely many nows—it is universal.

The experience that we undergo with the now, an experience about what the now is not and what it then is, is an exhibiting [Aufzeigen]. The exhibiting is thereby not an immediate knowing, but a movement, a mediation. In the same way what is known in sense certainty is not something immediately simple but something mediately simple. Thus, what sense certainty is as a whole, what remains in sense certainty itself when it is exhibited, that is the movement, the history of this movement. In this history that aspect of sense certainty is grasped and taken which is what is true in it. In this history sense certainty itself unfolds to the point of taking what is true in sense certainty: Sense certainty turns into perception. (Cf. what Hegel says about “universal” experience over against experience that is “undergone”—II, 81–82 [GW IX, 69; Hoff., 87; E.T., 65].)

c) The infinity of absolute knowledge as the being-sublated of the finite and as dialectic. The starting point of a confrontation with Hegel’s dialectic—the infinitude or finitude of being

If we look back on the whole of Hegel’s presentation of immediate knowledge and at our interpretation, then all of this certainly shows itself as a remarkable “history” and a constant movement back and forth. It was in this that sense certainty arrived at its truth for us. But this truth is not one truth among others—as if it were our opinion about this truth—but rather it is the only genuine truth which sense certainty can have, insofar as something exists in absolvence and for absolvence. The essence of the immediacy of immediate knowledge is mediation. What is shown again and again is the effort to keep from falling out of the immediacy, to avoid this falling out, in order to remain entirely in it. But it is worth noting that this has already always been our endeavor—the endeavor of those who know absolutely and who want to know absolutely. Thus, the effort was already in a certain way condemned to failing fundamentally. For as soon as we inquire at all into immediate knowledge and its essence, we are already beyond immediacy. What remains is only the one [das Eine], entirely immersed in immediacy, executing only an actual knowing of this kind—only intending, and not posing questions.

The fact that “intending” is in [Hegel’s] title for this section says not only that we “intend” but also that we inquire into “intending”—and in such a way that it gets decided in advance wherein alone the truth and being (essence) of intending and of the this can and must consist. And yet in this way we have brought to consciousness immediacy itself as such; and thereby we have learned that nothing lets itself be immediately grasped so little or not at all as what is immediate, when it is to be grasped in immediacy. To put it positively, comprehension of the immediacy of what is immediate requires most of all the total energy of absolving mediation. Because this mediation can establish itself initially only in complete indeterminacy—considering that the beginning is with what is immediate—this first part of Section A and Section A as a whole has its special difficulties. Only because Hegel construes sense certainty (what is immediate in its immediacy) always already from within the horizon of absolvence—only by virtue of this construction does sense certainty become visible. Sense certainty becomes further visible only by means of a reconstruction that is carried out in the light of this construction, a reconstruction intended to regain what is already broken and lost and to let it be seen as entirely wholesome and untouched.

What makes the beginning difficult is just the fact that on the one hand we have to carry out a construction in which we are concerned with comprehending the immediate, while on the other hand we are not allowed to stop with this construction, by taking its outcome by itself and one-sidedly. Rather, returning from the construction, we are to undertake the reconstruction right away.

One immediately obviates all possibilities of understanding when, instead of getting involved in the entire movement, one cuts oneself off from the movement which goes back and forth in the absolvent construction which reconstructs. And it is now a matter, not of noting our interpretation, but of letting it disappear as we try anew simply to read the text with the help of that interpretation—a reading which is left to each individual.

Clearly no age has known so much, or had at its disposal such ready means for knowing everything swiftly and for cleverly persuading everyone, as our age. But clearly no age has understood so little of what is essential about things as our age. And there is so little understanding, not because this age has fallen victim to a general imbecility, but because this age—in spite of its greed for everything—resists what is simple and essential and what promotes involvement and perseverance. Furthermore, this emptiness can spread because in the man of today the virtue of patience has ceased to exist.

Patience—that is the quiet anticipation in our persevering attention to what we should want, namely, that it be. Patience is the care [Sorge] which has turned away from all that noisy procuring [Besorgen] and has turned to the whole of Dasein. Patience is the truly human way of being thoughtful about things. Genuine patience is one of the basic virtues of philosophizing—a virtue which understands that we always have to build up the pile of kindling with properly selected wood so that it may at one point catch fire. Patience in the first and last instance—“patience”—this word has withdrawn from essential language. And we do not wish that this word become a slogan, but rather that we practice it and in practicing it gain a facility in it. It is in such practicing that we first attain to genuine measures of our Dasein and achieve the keen ability for differentiating what is offered to Dasein.

But the impatience of the many—who want to be finished already before they even begin, in order to be able to let go of their abiding impatience at the very first opportunity—this impatience might overtake us already with our first groping step into the work that we want to effect.

Right at the beginning of the Phenomenology of Spirit there is, as it were, a demand whose magnitude increases to the extent that it is not specifically and extensively dealt with. To speak concretely about the actual beginning, the demand is this: Just when we are concerned with comprehending immediate knowledge, precisely then we must carry out a construction in the light of absolute knowledge. At the same time we are not supposed to stop with this construction by taking its results one-sidedly for itself. Rather, the construction should take over the reconstruction of immediate knowledge. Thus, to the strangeness of this reconstructing construction there is added a complexity which necessarily begins with this construction, the movement back and forth, which is called in short “dialectic.”

In this distressing situation of initially not understanding or of finally misunderstanding the entire work—a situation from which no one can exclude himself—it is the lesser evil if at the beginning we lose courage and resign. The greater evil is to believe that the understanding of “dialectic” may eventually be attained by sheer cunning and imitated as a gimmick. This is, of course, in a certain respect possible, so much so that in the end nothing would resist such a detached thinking, to which all doors would open—but surely doors through which we pass from one vacuity into another, even believing that we have here a grasp of the fullness of actuality.

Even Hegel himself in his later period did not entirely overcome this danger of dialectic—not even Hegel himself, for whom dialectic grew out of a very definite problematic and from whom this problematic was realized by the original, substantial character of his philosophizing Dasein. That is why Hegel could and had to undergo the unequivocal experience of regarding dialectic as being productive in itself. For him it was no problem whether or not the principle of construction, whose unfolding is dialectic, is required by the actuality of the actual. It was required because Hegel understood being as absolute, in advance and without question; and this absoluteness and infinity never became a problem for him because they could never become a problem. This was the case, not because of a personal limitation of Hegel’s mind or even because of an inflexibility of conviction, but rather because of the power of the Weltgeist, which goes its ways to the end, while we remain its small satellites.

Every genuine philosophy is unique and only as such has the power to be repeated and to be effective again in a particular time and in keeping with the spirit and power of that time. But never in such a way that—whether sooner or later—it becomes something that belongs immediately to everyone, as, for example, in the Kantgesellschaft and now in the “International Hegel Society.” There are indeed many other opportunities than those provided by the names and works of philosophers for mutually securing for oneself a miserable importance. But Hegel is no longer to be protected from the fact that in this new year, which is the hundredth anniversary of his death, all kinds of incompetent enthusiasm prattles about him, and only because of the accidental and indifferent number of a “hundred.”

We protect the uniqueness of Hegel’s work only when we take the trouble to confront it thoroughly. This means that we introduce into the discussion the question whether and how this confrontation finds its necessity, that is to say, arises from the inner grounds of Dasein and thereby from the matter of philosophy itself.

We look for this intersecting of the confrontation in the problem of being as the guiding and fundamental question of philosophy. The question arises as to whether being in its essence is finite and whether and how this finitude is to be placed fundamentally within the problematic of philosophy, without finitude’s becoming a property which, as it were, hangs around beings and is taken up only occasionally. Or—to put the same question in another way—does the infinity of absolute knowledge determine the truth of being, and in such a way that it has already sublated everything that is finite into itself, so that all philosophizing moves only in this sublation and as such a sublation in the sense of dialectic? This question arises—or more precisely put: the question has not hitherto arisen and is just now about to be raised—as the questionableness which, ungrasped, has motivated previous metaphysics, though more externally and only for short periods. For the fact that finite and infinite beings (ens finitum and ens infinitum) have for a long time been differentiated with more or less felicity proves precisely that the question concerning the essence of being remains in indifference.

A confrontation with Hegel which begins in this way is not only inherently and historically necessary, but is also at the same time productive. This is so because for Hegel the infinity of being does not remain a formal principle, but rather grows out of a basic experience of beings as a whole and preserves an inner union with the genuine tradition of Western philosophy.

d) Points of orientation regarding the problem of the infinity of being: The absolvence of spirit from what is relative. The logical and subjective justification of infinity

Before we take up the interpretation again, I would like to provide some points of orientation with regard to the problem of the infinity of being, listing them rather than developing them.

First we should recall what, in an attempt to clarify the general character of the work, was said about the title “Science of the Experience of Consciousness” and “Science of the Phenomenology of Spirit.”7 For Hegel, “to experience” means to learn or come to know what something is not, and thus simultaneously what it is. Likewise, “to appear” or “to be a phenomenon” means for him to disunite, to become other in remaining self-identical. This history of the experience of the appearing of spirit arises in the most extreme remoteness of the most immediate and one-sided relatedness of knowing to the this. And this history takes as its course spirit’s finding its way back to itself from being lost. Spirit detaches itself (in the sense already characterized) from what is relative, in order to dissolve it in itself. Spirit’s detachment or absolvence from the relative occupies a special place in the total design of the work, namely, the place which lies in the transition from Sections A and B, taken together, to Section C. We saw already in a very rough way that it is with Section C that we actually and explicitly enter the realm of the absolute and that from this point on two divisions are slid into each other.

The absolvence of spirit from what is relative is in itself an overcoming of the disunity and disruption of consciousness in its own one-sidedness. As such an overcoming, absolvence is thus a deliverance, as it were, from that disruption. As absolvence, the absolute becomes absolution. Therefore, it is no accident that the finitude to be overcome within the Phenomenology of Spirit comes forth precisely at that juncture where the disunity of consciousness is known by consciousness without being already overcome in this knowing. On the contrary, this knowing only intensifies the disruption. This consciousness, which is aware of its own disunity, Hegel calls the “unhappy consciousness.” Hence, the final portion of the second part of the large Section B, which leads directly to Section C, deals with the unhappy consciousness.8 The unhappiness, the consciously present disruption of consciousness, is now to be carried over into the unity of the happiness of the absolute. But this happiness is not just the bliss present for itself which has discarded all unhappiness. Rather, this happiness is the happiness which dominates unhappiness and precisely therein needs it for itself.

The intimate connection of unhappiness and happiness—not established in a third thing but in happiness itself, which comes to itself by allowing unhappiness to belong to it—this way in which what is split into two belongs together as one constitutes the true infinity of the finite.

Regarding the Hegelian concept of infinity, we now have to consider two things: (1) Already very early, as soon as he actually decided to go into philosophy—thus, right after his theological period—Hegel anchored infinity in a place where the problem of being is rooted as a matter of course in the λόγος, in accordance with the tradition and the starting point of Western philosophy. This is expressed in the conception of thinking and logic as speculative knowledge, or dialectic. Hence, dialectic—as has often been emphasized—is grounded in the inherent content of the problem of being, grasped specifically as such. Dialectic is not the quick witchcraft of “this as well as that,” with whose help any mischief may be done and which one believes one must adopt, because for some reason dialectic is a powerful instrument that imposes an easy-going attitude on the matter of philosophy (the matter of being) or because dialectic goes so far as to bewitch one.

(2) The second point ties in quite closely with the logical grounding of infinity (which at the same time means the transformation of the logic of understanding). To be sure, with Descartes metaphysics is not subjected to a development of its problem in terms of a new content. Nevertheless, with Descartes metaphysics is subjected to an explicit transposition, or an orientation that is in certain respects even more radical, of the λόγος, or of ratio, toward its nearest conceivable ground, the ego, the cogitatio, the I, consciousness. From this point on, the way opens up for a new shaping of the content of metaphysics as it comes to light in the Leibnizean monadology, as a radical theory of the substantiality of substance. In a certain pre-Kantian sense, this theory is a preliminary form of Hegel’s fundamental thesis: Substance is in truth subject. But the work of Kant was needed first, in order to obtain in the “transcendental” a clear horizon for the metaphysical problematic. And then Fichte was needed, to take the absoluteness of the I into account for the first time—though incompletely—in the concrete labor of his doctrine of science.

Within the living presence of the works of Kant and Fichte, and conditioned by Schelling’s doctrine of identity, it fell to Hegel to comprehend the subject as absolute spirit—by installing the essence of true infinity, logically conceived, in the essence of I-hood as subjectivity and by letting the essence of true infinity spring from out of the latter.

Both the “logical” and the “subjective” grounding of infinity—as we call them in short—are already carried out in the thoroughly concrete investigations which are handed down to us as manuscripts from the Jena lectures. But in these manuscripts everything is still at the beginning and is more within the scope of a confrontation with tradition; it has not yet found its own necessary shape. This happens for the first time in the System of Science, whose first part, the Phenomenology, presents the grounding we mentioned as our second point (the grounding of infinity in the subject and as subject), while the second part, the Logic, implements the first grounding that we mentioned above (the logical grounding), which is inherently and necessarily grounded in the second one.

In order to give merely an idea of the early logical grounding of infinity in Hegel, a grounding which is decisive for everything that follows, let me make a brief reference to the discussion of infinity in the manuscripts of the Jena period. We must forego actually working out the development of infinity which is accomplished there.

What immediately meets the eye is that infinity is developed in close connection with a speculative overcoming of—which is at the same time a grounding and determining of—the Kantian table of categories, and that there is just as decisively at work a new delimitation of the ancient metaphysics of Plato and Aristotle.9 The essence of infinity “is the absolute sublation of determinateness, the contradiction that determinateness, so far as it is, is not, and so far as it is not, is.”10 Already here two things become clear: (1) the orientation of the determination of infinity to the “is” and (2) the determining (synthesis, simple) of the proposition, λόγος, but in the sense that the simple saying, speech, is in itself contradiction.

The “absolute opposition, infinity, is this absolute reflection {turning back} into itself of the determinate that is an other than itself (that is, not an other as such against which it would be indifferent on its own account, but rather its immediate opposite); and, as it is this, it is itself. This alone is the true nature of the finite: that it is infinite, that it sublates itself in its being. The determinate as such has no other essence than this absolute restlessness not to be what it is.”11 The “purely absolute movement, being outside itself while being in itself.”12 And accordingly: “To recall it provisionally, the true knowledge of the absolute is not that it will be merely demonstrated that the one and the many are one and this alone is absolute, but rather that in the one and the many itself the being-one [Einssein] of each one with the other is posited.”13

This turning back of the determinate into itself, while precisely not escaping to another determinate outside itself, belongs to the essence of infinity. But this turning back of the other into the one, whereby the difference becomes a non-difference and wherein what is differentiated remains preserved and sublated, this reflection which marks the essence of infinity is genuinely actual in the I. For the I, by positing itself as I, differentiates itself from itself, so much so that what is differentiated does not fall out of the I, but rather becomes visible precisely as what is actually not differentiated and is the same. Herein is manifest the inner connection between the logical and the subjective I-like [ichlich] grounding of infinity. What is truly and really infinite in the declared logical sense is the subject and, what is more, the absolute subject as spirit—as is to be shown in the Phenomenology.

Conversely, for our confrontation we infer from this that the subject, the I, is conceived primarily as “I think,” thus logically. But because what is logical is dialogical-dialectical, Hegel and German Idealism as a whole can grasp the totality of beings in their being from out of I-hood as infinity. This also comes to be expressed as follows: Infinity itself is the actual λόγος as concept.

This should be enough to clarify the subsequent direction of our interpretive confrontation with Hegel.

The absolvent observation of sense certainty showed that, in keeping with its manner of knowing, sense certainty intends the particular this, but that the truth of sense certainty, which it itself already states in the word this, is a universal. While sense certainty intends the particular, it does not take what is true for it; sense certainty does not take what is true, is thus not taking for true [Wahrnehmung, perception];* and yet sense certainty is in a certain way already a taking of what is true—insofar as it has what is true with it, without, of course, grasping it explicitly. Sense certainty thus confirms already in advance the right and necessity of perception; the absolvent knowing of sense certainty is pushed beyond sense certainty to the knowing of knowing as perception.

Earlier we indicated the difficulty that exists in trying to understand the Phenomenology of Spirit. That this work is difficult hardly needs a lengthy demonstration. That it is difficult also does not of itself amount to anything about which a great deal has to be said. However, it is useful and necessary to point out the reason for the difficulty. This reason lies in the fact that the work begins at once in terms of the absolute and requires constant, absolvent, reconstructing construction. That the work begins at once absolutely is all right. For one can begin absolutely only all at once—or not at all; with the absolute one cannot begin gradually. The work confronts us with the demand that we continuously comport ourselves absolutely. And what may be more difficult for the most finite than to be infinite?

But will our comprehension of the work not be commensurate to it if we simply go along with it, without contributing anything to it? Going along, certainly; but merely repeating and reading and reporting—in short review-papers—does not help. If we only do this sort of thing, then we learn (either right away or later, it does not matter when) something remarkable, namely, that the work stays mute if we do not contribute anything to it. We have to bring to the work nothing less than a living question and its demands for an appropriate treatment. It is only thus that the content of the work gets moving; and the inner movement of the work, its transitions, are what is decisive—not so much the material which is graspable in detail. Transitions have to be entered into; and as long as we stay on one or the other shore and talk back and forth, transitions can never be achieved.

However, what presses us—and Hegel in the same way—to stay on course is the question concerning the essence of being. The ways of its questioning and answering cross one another.

Hegel does not raise the question, but he offers a response—prompted a long time ago by the inner constraint of the tradition—to the question concerning the essence of beings: He responds with the fundamental thesis that the essence of beings is infinity. We have discussed briefly what this means by observing (1) the logical and (2) the subjective grounding of infinity. We clarified how infinity stems from the “is” of the simple proposition as the determination of something as something. This infinity does not mean a continuous alignment of determinations, endlessly going forward from one to another, but the contrary; it means the return of something into itself, the reflection of the determinate back into itself, so that the determinate (as the other) returns to the one, and the other (as what is differentiated from the determinate) receives it; it means that the other (in unison with the determinate) becomes undifferentiated and remains preserved in sameness with it.

And now, when seen externally, what is astonishing is that this concept of infinity finds its proof and its concretion equally immediately in the I. For the I is that actual which, in positing itself as “I am I,” differentiates itself from itself—but in such a way that what is differentiated does not fall away from what makes the differentiation but rather is taken back into what makes the differentiation and remains preserved therein. This peculiar difference of the non-differentiated is actual in the I. Thus, the logical difference, “the determinateness,” and along with it the logical concept of infinity, are rooted in the I (logic as thinking is an I think). And a logic with such an orientation is not a doctrine of the proposition, detached from the I, but a logic which necessarily includes I-hood. In a Kantian sense it is a transcendental logic which has understood that, because λόγος is in itself infinite, the I-character is essential for thinking. This means that the actuality of the infinite is subject in the absolute sense of spirit.

*[Das Meinen (intending/meaning) and das Meine (mine) are intimately tied together in the Phenomenology of Spirit; in the following pages the connection that these two words have in German is impossible to maintain in translation.]

1. II, 73 [GW IX, 63; Hoff., 79; E.T., 58].

2. II, 67 [GW IX, 58; Hoff., 70; E.T., 52].

3. VII, 2, 20 [Philosophy of Mind, 12].

4. II, 74 [GW IX, 63; Hoff., 79; E.T., 58].

5. II, 68 [GW IX, 59; Hoff., 71; E.T., 53).

6. II, 68 [GW IX, 59; Hoff., 71; E.T., 53–54)

7. II. 73 [GW IX, 63; Hoff., 79; E.T., 58].

8. II, 84 [GW IX, 71; Hoff., 89; E.T., 67].

9. II, 77 [GW IX, 66; Hoff., 83; E.T., 61)

10. II, 73 [GW IX, 63; Hoff., 79; E.T., 58].

11. Ibid.

12. Ibid.

13. XVII, 400ff. [trans. W. Kaufmann, Hegel: Reinterpretation, Texts, and Commentary (London: Weidenfield and Nicolson, 1966), pp. 461–65].

14. XVII, 402; cf. the piece on p. 404 about the market woman [trans., p. 464].

15. II. 74 [GW IX, 64; Hoff., 80; E.T., 59]

16. Ibid.

*[According to F. W. von Herrmann, das Diesige means in der Art des Dies-seins: having the character of being a this.]

**[The German word used here (Zusehen) normally has an object. Here it does not. This lack of object seems deliberate on Heidegger’s part. It may be intended to keep our focus on the process, rather than taking us immediately to an object of that activity.]

17. II, 74–75 [GW IX, 64; Hoff., 80; E.T., 59].

18. II, 75 [GW IX, 64: Hoff., 80; E.T., 59].

19. II, 75 [GW IX, 64; Hoff., 81; E.T., 59]

*[The word (the) now translates the German noun (das) Jetzt; the word “now” (in quotation marks) translates the German adverb jetzt.]

20. II, 76 [GW IX, 65; Hoff., 82; E.T., 60].

21. II, 79 [GW IX, 67; Hoff., 84; E.T., 62].

22. II, 84 [GW IX, 70; Hoff., 89; E.T., 66].

*[Ek-sistenz].

23. Cf. II, 382, 491, 533f. [GW IX, 276, 351, 380–81; Hoff., 362, 458, 496; E.T., 308, 395, 430].

24. II, 76 [GW IX, 65; Hoff., 82; E.T., 60].

*[Through a printer’s error, the number 2 is missing in the German text.]

25. II, 49 [GW IX, 43; Hoff., 51; E.T., 38].

26. Ibid.

1. II, 77 [GW IX, 66; Hoff., 83; E.T., 61].

2. Ibid.

3. II, 79 [GW IX, 67; Hoff., 84; E.T., 62].

4. II, 79 [GW IX, 67; Hoff., 84; E.T., 63].

5. II, 80 [GW IX, 67; Hoff., 85; E.T., 63].

6. Ibid.

7. Cf. above, pp. 18–26.

8. II, 158–73 [GW IX, 122–31; Hoff., 158–71; E.T., 126–38].

9. Cf. below, pp. 102ff.

10. Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie, ed. Lasson, p. 27 [GW VII, 29; trans. J. W. Burbridge and G. di Giovanni, The Jena System 1804–5: Logic and Metaphysics (Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1986), p. 32].

11. Ibid., pp. 30f. [GW VII, 33; Logic and Metaphysics, 35].

12. Ibid., p. 31 [GW VII, 34; Logic and Metaphysics, 35].

13. Ibid., p. 33 [GW VII, 39; Logic and Metaphysics, 37].

*[The words “taking for true” are used in translation here in order to keep visible the “literal” meaning of Wahrnehmung. This meaning is implied in the usual English rendering as perception. Our translation is also in keeping with what Hegel intends as he thinks through Wahrnehmung.]