
# SECOND PART

Self-consciousness

# §12. Self-consciousness as the truth of consciousness

a) “The Truth of Self-certainty”

The first main section of the Phenomenology of Spirit carried the title “A. Consciousness,” without—let it be noted—being defined any further. By contrast, the titles of section B and C are defined further: “B. Self-consciousness: The Truth of Self-certainty,” and “C. Reason: The Certainty and Truth of Reason.” This is not by accident. In Section A we do not yet have any truth at all, and therefore none can be named. And we do not yet have any truth in Section A because truth is constructed in advance in view of the whole as the truth of absolute knowledge. In Section A knowledge is not yet at all the true. Rather, the true is only the object as the alien other of knowledge, so that, in terms of knowing, the object is not known at all as what is other than knowing. This is because knowing knows in accordance with its own sense and so forgets itself and is lost exclusively in the object. The truth of knowing (knowing as the true) is reached only when knowing becomes an object for itself, when knowing is a knowing for itself, when certainty is no longer the certainty of the sensible, but “certainty of its self.” Certainty, it should be said as a reminder, does not mean here an insight into the security of a knowing or even certainty as certainty of the I in Descartes’s sense of a fundamentum absolutum inconcussum. Rather, certainty means knowing in the unified form of the how of knowing and the what of the known. Only where knowing or certainty knows itself is there the possibility of truth at all, insofar as truth is grasped absolvently in advance. Hence, truth and certainty are not placed beside each other. Rather, it is the “truth of self-certainty” that must be dealt with.

Considering the unprecedented power and confidence of the construction of the entire work, it is no superficial observation to say that Section A does not yet carry a more precise thematic title of the kind first given with Section B. The genuine rigor peculiar to the philosopher is manifest in the inner concentration and discretion for what is appropriately demanded by the whole of the work of each of its parts. Compared with this rigor, all the so-called rigor of the sciences remains an arbitrary, limited procedure governed by permanently inadequate perspectives and ideals. Hence, it always leads to an inner perversion of philosophizing when the latter is reduced to such ideals, and all the more so when these ideals reveal the dubious form of the nineteenth-century concept of science.

However, this “petty detail” concerning the difference between the titles of Sections A and B shows its significance, and at the same time proves to be something which Hegel quite clearly knew, when we reflect on the words which he wrote in the introduction to Section B: “With self-consciousness, then, we have, therefore, entered the realm where truth is at home.”1 Hegel often employs the expression “at home” [einheimisch], above all in a crucial passage of the preface to the Phenomenology2 where he speaks of the “concept” as “truth ripened to the form in which it is at home,” the form in which knowledge has absolutely returned to itself. The concept presents the absolute self-comprehension of reason in the sublated history of the essential forms of knowledge—concept understood, not in terms of traditional logic as the simple representation of something in general, but as absolute knowledge.

With self-consciousness truth is generally at home, on its own ground and soil. By contrast, in the sphere of consciousness truth is in a foreign land, is alienated from itself, and is without a ground. As the interpretation of perception showed, absolute truth, in which contradiction is really to be thought, is what is strange for consciousness, against which consciousness defends itself, and which consciousness tries to avoid.

However, here we must immediately keep something else in mind. Seen absolvently, self-consciousness is the middle between consciousness and reason, which, when developed as spirit, is the true absolute. Self-consciousness is the middle with whose help spirit is disclosed in the history of the experiences which knowing undergoes with itself. As this mediating middle, which, sublating itself, is delivered over to spirit as the absolute truth, self-consciousness points not only in the direction of the origin [Herkunft] from out of consciousness but also simultaneously in the direction of the future [Zukunft] which is its due and comes to it as spirit. (We deliberately take zukommen in a twofold way: (a) We take it in the sense of “belonging” or “being due”: As spirit belongs to self-consciousness, spirit is due to self-consciousness as its true. (b) We take it in the sense of “arriving at something, which is not yet at our disposal but will be.”) Accordingly, as soon as the absolute essence of self-consciousness is unfolded, spirit must show itself in self-consciousness.

Now, in the introduction to Section B, Hegel presents a sketch of the phenomenology of self-consciousness as such, and in the final stage of this introduction, which is indeed a transition, “the concept of spirit is already extant for us.”3 Hegel concludes this preliminary look into the speculative essence of self-consciousness with the significant statement: “It is in self-consciousness, as the concept of spirit, that consciousness first reaches its turning point, where it steps forward, out of the colorful lustre of the sensuous here-and-now of the empty night of the supersensible beyond, into the spiritual day of the present.”4 Every word here needs the interpretation that is concretely given in the work itself, and initially in Section B.

The absolvent history of self-consciousness allows spirit to appear. But self-consciousness in turn has emerged by way of the absolute history of consciousness. In this history we who know absolvently played a peculiar role. We had continually to take the place of consciousness and thus bring it forward, since, left to itself, consciousness turns directly away from self-consciousness, from the intrinsic difference, and from the infinite. Now, the more genuinely knowing is unfolded as absolute knowledge, the more we give up this role of proxy. It is not that we as mere onlookers would be excluded. On the contrary, we are always more fully and more originally involved as the ones who execute the history of consciousness. The more consciousness and knowing return into absolute knowledge from out of consciousness’s alienation in itself, the more genuine consciousness becomes that which we ourselves are from the beginning. This means that absolute knowledge, which has absolvently come back to itself, takes our place; it actually fills our position now; and there is no longer anything which we for our part could or should be proxy for. We ourselves, the “we,” are brought to our true selfhood. We have played out the role that we had at the beginning of the Phenomenology of Spirit—a role which frequently had to change in the course of the history of the phenomenology.

Now, the first change takes place in the transition from consciousness to self-consciousness. But the real “turning point” is located at the point where self-consciousness conceives itself as spirit. After this turning point the work proceeds, as it were, in its own clarity, a clarity continually deriving from the work itself; and from this point on, the work leaves behind all the central philosophical difficulties insofar as knowing, having been clarified in its absolute essence, is now in itself and only with itself.

b) The significance of the transition from consciousness to self-consciousness

The being of the object has now become the possession of self-consciousness. The truth is thereby attained of what was already announced in the course of the interpretation of intending: namely, that the intending is not simply lost in the object, but also begins to take back into its own possession what it comprehends, albeit only quite extraneously.

Thus, with the interpretation of the truth of the object of consciousness, deliberation itself enters the realm in which truth is at home, without, of course, already traversing this realm. And traversing is possible only if the first step in this realm is measured with full clarity concerning its peculiarity. In other words, for everything else—for the form as well as the fullness of content—it is crucial to comprehend the inherent essence of the transition from consciousness to self-consciousness. This is to say that this transition is not to be represented according to the practice of common understanding. When one approaches Hegel’s problem with representations stemming from that understanding, any intelligibility is hopelessly undermined; just as the first sentence of the work and all the other statements about consciousness must remain closed off as long as one assumes that Hegel is concerned with transforming our natural attitude about things into a philosophical posture or with offering an epistemology.

Just as the decisive step in our interpretation of Section A consisted in clearing away these prejudices and defining what it means for immediate knowing to be our object, so now we must undertake for Section B the still more difficult and no less important interpretive step which will place the phenomenology of self-consciousness in the proper light. Everything else after that is only a supplementary explanation which has to see to it that the course that has been taken and the horizon that this course has opened be maintained.

In order to render intelligible in advance what is peculiar to the Hegelian (i.e., absolvent) transition from consciousness to self-consciousness, we first want to contrast this transition with common representation. By common representation we do not simply and primarily mean pre-philosophical opinion, but precisely the philosophical view, which takes spirit and existence as something extant and explains them by way of what is extant. This view was prevalent in philosophy for a long time and, through the domination of positivism, gained power precisely in the post-Hegelian period of the nineteenth century. Naturalism in the sense of a biological or even mechanistic explanation of spirit is only a consequence of positivism. Even where naturalism is set aside or does not even appear at all, there is no guarantee that positivism is overcome. On the contrary, positivism, in the form of the psychology attributed to Nietzsche, has spread more than ever. The influence of a psychologically interpreted Nietzsche (an influence which is just beginning) is the barrier which excludes us today from knowledge of the essence of philosophy and pulls us down into a psychologization of everything spiritual.

In terms of a current, so-called “unprejudiced” point of view, one might be inclined to say initially that the Hegelian transition to self-consciousness is considerably complicated and thus artificial. It is a going back and forth from object to consciousness, by reciprocally playing one mode of consciousness against the other, in order finally to arrive at the thesis according to which understanding basically has its truth in self-consciousness—a thesis which, in spite of a vast expenditure of dialectical differentiations and sublations, is not even truly discerning. Should not the Hegelian procedure be juxtaposed with the experience—clear, unequivocal, and above all immediately corresponding to actuality—that we are constantly related to our acts of consciousness and lived experiences as our own and as thus belonging to us? And does not this relation unmistakably announce that our consciousness is simultaneously also self-consciousness? This experience is so elementary that it could not escape philosophy from early on. It had already occupied Aristotle expressly; and the reditus in se ipsum is almost the commonplace of all human inquiry. Descartes gives expression to this in his proposition that all cogitare means an act of consciousness. Every consciousness of an object is simultaneously a consciousness of consciousness of the object, and is thus self-consciousness. Hence, seen from this perspective, the Hegelian transition might not only be seen as complicated, artificial, and thereby undiscerning; but, moreover, Hegel mistakes the proper character of self-consciousness of consciousness, in that he does not give to the immediacy of the knowing of this relation its due. And he does so although, precisely in the history of philosophy from Descartes to Kant, it had become always more clearly and more significantly explicit that each perceptio is at the same time apperceptio. Certainly it can be admitted, or in any case discussed, that we occasionally deceive ourselves in our self-conscious, reflective observation and consideration of our own acts of consciousness and that lived experiences with their transient character are not so palpably graspable as the things around us. However, this does not contradict the basic fact that consciousness of things outside us always goes together with consciousness of events in us. Being conscious of external things, we are aware of this consciousness itself; we are even aware of this consciousness of things. Therefore, it might still be said that on his way Hegel from the beginning neglected an essential peculiarity of the matter (of self-consciousness) and that he cannot make up for this negligence with a multilayered dialectic.

We do well to review these arguments, because they are the ones that immediately intrude whenever we talk about consciousness and self-consciousness and indeed the relation of both. We must now make clear to ourselves the peculiarity and fundamental intention of the Hegelian transition from consciousness to self-consciousness, over against these “evident” considerations.

In the first place, Hegel does not at all wish to prove that our consciousness is at the same time also self-consciousness and that both always occur together. Just as little does he want to dispute that consciousness immediately knows about itself and discovers that in the extant human being a stream of consciousness and the flow of time drain away. Hegel does not want to prove the one or dispute the other, because his problematic does not move at all in this dimension of the “natural attitude.” Hegel would say that the entire discussion that is put forward here and which we can visualize in an exemplary fashion in Descartes’s “cogito sum” operates in the sphere of consciousness. This means that the self, too, is something that at the same time is connected with the consciousness of objects, is extant, and can be known objectively by us. In such a knowing of consciousness as self-consciousness, we move entirely and continuously in the realm of what is relative and abstract. This is not a transition of consciousness to self-consciousness, but a dragging of self-consciousness out into the field of what is only immediately known. But—Hegel would have to say—an inquiry into and speculative presentation of the relation between consciousness and self-consciousness would not be grasped at its roots if one were to understand this relation as though over against the consciousness of objects; and thus, over against objects and things the alterity of self-consciousness, its unthingly character, is to be proved, as though it were only a matter of preventing the self from reification [Verdinglichung]. The task is a totally different one and with far-reaching consequences. It has to do neither with demonstrating the co-extantness of consciousness and self-consciousness nor with the proof of their alterity, but rather with revealing the fact that self-consciousness is the truth of consciousness.

“Consciousness is self-consciousness.” This sentence must be taken in its speculative import. The “is” does not mean that along with acts of consciousness which are directed at things there is always also extant an act of reflection accompanying them. Rather, the sentence “Consciousness is self-consciousness” means that the essence of consciousness (“essence” understood speculatively and absolutely) lies in self-consciousness. Consciousness presences [west] as self-consciousness. We have something corresponding exactly to this in the universal proposition: “Dissimilarity [Verschiedenheit] is sameness.” Common sense considers this proposition to be nonsensical: Dissimilarity means just being dissimilar and different and does not mean sameness at all. Philosophy says, “Yes, exactly!” The dissimilarity of two dissimilar things, as dissimilarity, is possible only insofar as the dissimilar things are related to the unity of what is the same; and in view of this sameness dissimilarity can be what it is essentially. In the proposition “Dissimilarity is sameness” the expression “is” has the speculative meaning of “has the essence in …,” whereby essence is determined in advance speculatively, in accordance with the guiding concept of being in general, as onto-theo-ego-logical. Dissimilarity has its essence in sameness. And, correspondingly, the other way around: sameness does not mean the empty monotonous interchangeability of something with itself, but rather the unity of what belongs together. Sameness is that belonging together, which is in itself at the same time dissimilarity.

The transition from consciousness to self-consciousness is the return into the essence of consciousness, which is essentially self-consciousness and as such constitutes the inner possibility of consciousness, in everything and anything which belongs to consciousness itself. Therefore, this return into the essence of consciousness is to be carried out only within a simultaneous or rather a prior concrete unfolding of the essential structures of consciousness itself, so that in terms of these structures and their proper relations the essential relatedness to self-consciousness becomes evident. Thus, we are in fact not dealing with the trivial statement that consciousness would be unobtainable without an accompanying self-consciousness.

If consciousness with regard to its own relative truth is thus supposed to be brought back to truth as self-consciousness, then, according to Hegel’s approach, the basis is thus obtainable in advance in terms of which what is brought up as a basic fact can be made intelligible and justified, namely, why cogito = cogito me cogitare and must be that. If Hegel from the very beginning keeps within this dimension of the self, then his starting point is nothing less than the transformation and working out of a fundamental intention of Kant’s problematic, which is expressed as the original synthetic unity of transcendental apperception (the “I think” that must accompany all my representations) as the condition for the possibility of all objectivity. Precisely because Hegel pushes for the speculative absolute overcoming of the Kantian position, he had to take over Kant’s basic starting point. Hegel had to take into account consciousness and the I in its transcendence. Certainly this transcendence undergoes a peculiar contraction and formalization through its orientation toward the relational character of knowledge (thinking, understanding, λόγος), which is already to be found in Kant. But, of course, on the other hand, by this means its absolutization and simultaneously its dissolution become possible in Hegel.

In whatever way we are obliged to take up a critical stance on this, it is crucial above all else that, with the speculative explication of consciousness in all of its forms and with the interpretation of its transition to self-consciousness, consciousness is from the beginning posited and unfolded as transcendental (in its transcendence and only in it). In spite of all our fundamental critical reservations regarding the manner of the absolvent overcoming of the finitude of transcendence, we must admire in a positive sense the unprecedented power, confidence, and fullness with which philosophizing here moves in transcendence itself.

Thus, the transition of consciousness to self-consciousness is not simply a re-execution of everyday self-reflection, but the absolvent return from the transcendentally interpreted essence of consciousness into the essence of self-consciousness. But even with this interpretation, we have not yet grasped the peculiarity of the Hegelian problem. The view of the transition which we presented just now can (particularly for us today) awaken the illusion that, although we are not dealing with an ontic bending back of consciousness in perception, we are still concerned with the ways which lead into the essential sphere of the lived experiences of pure consciousness as the sphere of the pure I. It is, after all, not possible that this is what we are dealing with, because Hegel does not want to treat the sphere of self-consciousness as the beginning and end of everything. Self-consciousness is only a passageway. It is itself still something relative within infinity, whose full truth is to be grasped in the concept. Thereby it is also true that for Hegel self-consciousness is from the beginning never represented as a realm for finding the essential coherence of lived experiences in the sense of a region of possible research. Rather, in self-consciousness Hegel is concerned with the actuality of spirit. Briefly, Hegel is not concerned with the being conscious of the self as what is reflectively knowable but with being conscious of the self as a higher actuality over against the being of the objects extant for consciousness. The task is to render the being of the self, or self-being, intelligible in absolvence.

§13. The being of self-consciousness

a) The attainment of the self-being of the self in its independence

One must remember that for Hegel the being of the self—as well as the actuality of spirit and of the absolute in general—is primarily determined by “consciousness” and by “knowing,” a determination which is closely tied in with the interpretation of being in terms of λόγος. To put it in historical terms, the new orientation toward consciousness in modern philosophy since Descartes is not a radically new beginning over against antiquity, but only its extension and transference to the subject. Because this transference is not understood in terms of its motivations and goals, the question concerning the being of the self is gradually and finally buried under the issues of consciousness and knowledge. The egological orientation of the ontological still remains bound to the tradition in the form of the I as “ego cogito,” “I think,” “I know,” and “I state.” (The fact that for Descartes the cogitationes are not the same as acts of thinking, but that cogitationes mean all acts and behavior of the I, including its practical as well as emotional behavior, is not operative at all in what is decisive for the foundation of his philosophy. For precisely the calling of all acts cogitationes proves that the being of the self, in all its dimensions, is primarily conceived in terms of knowledge.)

But although Hegel, too, conceives the I in terms of cogito and self-being in terms of self-consciousness, one must keep in mind the drive toward the absolvent comprehension of self-being in order to understand the entire section on self-consciousness, and particularly the difficult introduction to it.1 Yet this introduction only opens the door to the rest of the whole work, whose absolvent questioning is now no longer concerned with the objectivity of objects, but with the essence of the stance and standing of the self, i.e., with its independence. The formal regularity of the dialectical progress and transitions here too conceals the fundamental posture of Hegelian philosophizing and provokes the unfortunate illusion that we are dealing only with an expository presentation of forms of consciousness and with the appearing of types of knowing. Basically, however, we are dealing with the transmission of knowing into the absolute self-reliance of the knower, the effecting of the self-unfolding of the actuality of spirit.

If we fail to grasp this transposition of the entire questioning as it takes place in this transition, then we understand nothing of this work. But if we grasp this transposition, then it suddenly becomes clear that, for example, Kierkegaard’s entire critique of Hegel collapses as irrelevant. Only when we keep in mind the independence of the self, self-being, as the guiding problem does the transition of “A. Consciousness” to “B. Self-consciousness” lose its strangeness. In all other cases this strangeness remains. Above all, we should not talk ourselves into believing that this transition is self-evident—perhaps by an appeal to the popular view that now, after “theoretical” consciousness is dealt with in A, the “practical” one has its turn.

In fact, the transition is strange as soon as we pay attention to the new title. After discussing sensibility, perception, and understanding, there follow sections that are entitled “Independence and Dependence of Self-consciousness: Lordship and Bondage” and “Freedom of Self-consciousness: Stoicism, Skepticism, and the Unhappy Consciousness.” But if we keep in mind that nowhere in the Phenomenology of Spirit—not even in Section A as already discussed—are we dealing with “epistemology” but that already here it is solely a question of the true actuality of spirit, then we have no cause to wonder if, in the transition to self-being, we run into various shapes of freedom. In keeping with the Kantian inquiry, freedom is indeed a kind of causality. But causality is the determination of a being with regard to its Dasein, its existence.

If, on the basis of what we have said provisionally now, we keep in mind what we have claimed to be the fundamental direction of Section B, then there is no risk of passing over the crucial part of the introduction to Section B: On pages 133–39 [GW IX, 104–108; Hoff., 135–40; E.T., 106–110] Hegel undertakes nothing less than to develop a new concept of being. So, on the contrary, we can infer from the appearance of such passages that, if such considerations are necessary by way of introduction, the entire section must be devoted to an essential problem of being. (Here we must take note, with respect to terminology, of the corresponding issue which we already mentioned about the use of the term concept [Begriff]. This term stands sometimes for “representation” and sometimes for “concept” in the traditional sense. But sometimes it is also used in the Hegelian coinage of “absolute concept.” Correspondingly, being (1) means the indifferent substantive of the neutral “is” as copula, (2) is the designation for each and every being as actual, and (3) means, in a limited sense, the objectivity of the object of consciousness.)

In connection with the explication of the new concept of being, this introduction provides us with a preliminary view of the essence of self-consciousness as it is in and for itself. One sees at this point how little the appeal to reflection contributes to the clarification of this essence. Reflection is so little taken into consideration that the essence of self-consciousness is constructed by way of being-for-another. The moment of reflection (not in terms of knowing and consciousness, but as a mode of being) is admittedly not excluded. On the contrary, it is asserted in a more original form. The to-itself [Zu-sich] which belongs to the being-in-itself of the self—the return into itself as truth—is grasped as desire, as the passion of the self for itself. This takes place in such a way, it is true, that the satisfaction of this desire takes place by way of the consciousness of objects and hence does not arrive at its goal, always producing new desires. This means that the self is not simply extant, to be met in a reflective gaze, but rather that the self must in its being become necessary for itself. However, these moments of self-consciousness—being-for-itself and being-for-another—are not two determinations that simply stand side by side. Rather, they belong to each other in a way that, in keeping with what was said earlier, can be expressed as follows: Consciousness of the object is not left behind and given up as consciousness returns to itself and becomes self-consciousness, but is sublated and drawn into consciousness’s knowledge of itself. This means that, in keeping with its essence, self-consciousness has a “double object,”2 in the sense that (1) the I posits itself as particular vis-à-vis another particular, and (2) the I takes into itself this doubling and thus manifests in itself a relation to the absolute. This doubling is the decisive phenomenon for the speculative construction of self-consciousness—seen not only in its closest aspect (insofar as we approach from the side of consciousness and its object), but also in terms of the guiding problem of independence.

In the preceding discussion we have presented, negatively and in individual stages, the peculiar character of the transition from consciousness to self-consciousness as follows:

1. The transition is not simply accomplished through inner perception.

2. It is no proof that consciousness and self-consciousness are together extant.

3. It does not establish the unthingly character of self-consciousness in distinction from the thingly character of the objects of consciousness.

4. It does not secure the sphere of pure lived experiences as the realm for observing essences.

5. It does not refer transcendental consciousness to its transcendental presupposition as self-consciousness in the sense of the Kantian transcendental apperception.

Expressed in positive terms, the transition means the attainment of the self-being of the self in its independence. And with this the most inherent problematic of the entire movement of the phenomenology is intensified and becomes really explicit for the first time—a problematic which is nothing other than the disclosive attainment of the absolute actuality of spirit. A paragraph in the introduction to Section B, in which Hegel develops the new concept of being, meets the crucial significance of the transitional stage with reference to the possibility of the speculative exposition of the independence of the self. We must now make this problem more acute in the following way, in order to understand the manner of its treatment.

The outcome of Section A was that truth cannot be at home in consciousness, because there, according to the most proper requirement of knowledge, truth must reside in the object of consciousness, an object which remains an alien other to knowing. Truth is unconditioned universality, the inner difference which exists as I. In being an I, the self-identity of being-other-than-itself has its native realm. This thesis grows out of the speculative interpenetration of consciousness. But it also immediately reveals a thorny new problematic. For is not the I, in its being an I, precisely the outstanding and first of all real particular? Can a reified this ever be as particularized as the I, which though being an I, though being in the self as an I, nevertheless accomplishes knowing, the true and knowing realization of particularity? Precisely because being is defined in terms of being known and in that way stands so much higher, and in each case is more genuinely knowledge, for that reason being an I must be the true being of the particularized particular. This is exactly the opposite of what resulted at the end of Section A, according to which the interior is the universal.

We can reduce the new problematic which has now emerged to the following questions and then place the approximate answers alongside them: (1) In what manner alone can the I be absolute truth, assuming that the I has to be the truth at all? Answer: Only in such a way that the particular I as self-consciousness is in itself absolute being [Wesen]. But the second question arises at once, in relation to this answer: (2) Can self-consciousness as such be absolute truth at all? Does self-consciousness dispose in itself the knowledge which can know the absolute absolutely, in order to be absolute in such knowing? Answer: The inner difference, the absolutely true in knowing, does indeed exist for self-consciousness; but self-consciousness is not completed thereby. Precisely because self-con sciousness knows the absolute in itself [in self-consciousness], the absolute still remains for self-consciousness the other, or its extreme.

The absolute remains the extreme for self-consciousness. Knowing itself thus, self-consciousness knows itself as a knowledge which essentially struggles for the absolute, but in this struggle fights its way to a constant subjugation. “Consciousness of … its existence and activity is only an agonizing over this existence and activity”3: the knowledge of failure in what drives its own essence. Thus, self-consciousness is unhappy, just at that place where it unfolds unto its own essential character; it is the unhappy consciousness. Self-consciousness cannot really conceive and grasp itself as that which it already in a certain way understands its own truth to be, as something absolutely unchangeable, which finds itself (its truth) neither in the object nor exclusively in the subject of this object. It finds itself rather in a higher self, which knows itself as the unity of the first self-consciousness and consciousness of the object, or as spirit, or—in its preliminary form—as reason. If this occurs, then “a self-consciousness exists for a self-consciousness. Only thus is it in fact self-consciousness; for only in this way does the unity of itself in its otherness become explicit for it.… With this the concept of spirit is already extant for us.”4 For “reason is the certainty of consciousness {i.e., of self-consciousness} that it is all reality.”5

Granting all the reservations and reductions, we have here a relation which corresponds to what was already announced in perception. Perception stands and mediates between sensibility and understanding in such a way that perception takes up sensibility and already attests to understanding, although in the negative way of resisting it. Correspondingly, in a higher connection, self-consciousness (B) is located between Consciousness (A) and Reason (C). Self-consciousness takes up consciousness in itself as its truth, but in such a way that self-consciousness simultaneously attests to reason—this again only in the [negative] way that, as it continually attempts to overpower reason, self-consciousness drives itself to continual defeat and remains unhappy in this failure.

The unhappy consciousness is neither simply unhappy nor first made unhappy afterwards. Rather, this consciousness is not yet happy, but in such a way that it knows about happiness precisely in knowing about its unhappiness. The knowing of unhappiness is not a relative, abstract confirmation that a disagreeable condition is extant. It is knowing’s restlessness, the disruption of not being able to achieve happiness. Thus, in a certain manner true being (the absolute) already arrives at certainty in self-consciousness.

b) The new concept of being as inhering-in-itself, life. Being and time in Hegel—Being and Time

Unhappy knowledge constitutes the being of self-consciousness. Just as in the construction of perception we had to anticipate the understanding already in the form of deception and what lies therein, so too the construction of self-consciousness now needs the anticipatory determination of absolute being. Only in the light of absolute being can the stages of self-consciousness be grasped absolvently and above all can the final stage, unhappy consciousness, be determined in its speculative being. To put it more clearly and more appropriately: It is only from out of this genuine being that self-being in its various stages unfolds to its own truth, to spirit, which is the absolute, so much so that spirit is concept.

The passage in the introduction in which the new concept of being is developed in a preliminary way runs from pages 133–39 [GW IX, 104–108; Hoff., 135–40; E.T., 106–111]. We divide this passage into two parts: (1) on page 133 [GW IX, 104; Hoff., 135; E.T., 106], beginning with “The object which … “and continuing to page 137 [GW IX, 107; Hoff., 138; E.T., 108] “Since we started from the first immediate unity,” and (2) page 137 [GW IX, 109; Hoff., 138; E.T., 109] beginning with “This other life, however” and continuing to page 139 [GW IX, 108; Hoff., 140; E.T., 110] “With this the concept of spirit is already.…”

As we said, we are dealing here with the explication of a new concept of being. This can only mean that we are dealing with an understanding of being in another sense than that to be found earlier in the Phenomenology, and indeed in a sense which complies with the meaning of the absolute concept of being for Hegel. Intrinsically, this concept of being is and must be old, as old as Western philosophy in its two main stages, which we designate externally with the pair of names Parmenides-Heraclitus and Plato-Aristotle. Hegel’s crucial step consists in unfolding in their own essential import the fundamental motifs which were predetermined in the ancient point of departure, namely, the logical, egological, and theological motifs. The new concept of being is the old and ancient concept in its most extreme and total completion. Thus, with the passage just mentioned we arrive at a point where we can really substantiate for the first time that and to what extent the science of the phenomenology of spirit is nothing other than the fundamental ontology of absolute ontology, or onto-logy in general. The Phenomenology of Spirit is the last stage of a possible justification of ontology.

To put the same thing in historical terms, we can say that since antiquity—in Aristotle no less than in Plato, and in Parmenides in a preliminary form, of course—the being of beings is determined as εἶδος, ἰδέα, idea, and thus related to seeing, knowing, and λόγος. Therefore, philosophizing as inquiry into the being of beings is idealism, a title which should not be taken as the label of an epistemological orientation and viewpoint, but as a designation for the basic approach to the problem of being, and thus to what lies on this side of all ordinary, so-called epistemological factions. In this respect we can say that the Phenomenology of Spirit is the deliberate, explicit, and absolute justification of idealism of which Hegel speaks subsequently.6

Finally, we can clarify the same thing in yet another way, with reference to a problem which we have frequently touched upon earlier.7 Since Aristotle the determinations of being are called categories, and the problem of being has the form of the problem of categories. Kant arrives at the multiplicity of categories and thus at the same time at the unitary character of the determinations of being by taking as a guide the table of judgments, which comes from traditional logic. With reference to this procedure by Kant, Hegel states, from his position of absolute knowing: “But to take up the plurality of categories again in some way or other as a discovery—for example, from the judgments and thus to be satisfied with them—is in fact to be regarded as an offence against science. Where else should the understanding be able to demonstrate a necessity, if it is unable to do so in its own self, which is pure necessity?”8

This harsh judgment of Kant by Hegel is justified and intelligible only if we understand him to mean an “offence against the science” in the sense of absolute science, which to Hegel is the essence of philosophy. For his part Kant speaks of a “scandal of philosophy” in another, although basically the same, respect. Both judgments concern, not persons, but rather the course of the most intrinsic problematic of philosophy, which is always “scandalous” when measured against that which in human machinations at any given time boasts of being philosophy.

What has been said should once again clarify initially the entire range of the passage and of the context whose interpretation occupies us. We shall try now to elucidate the first part of the specified passage.

The explication of the new, that is, the proper, absolute concept of being is nothing other than the clarification of the “result” which emerged from the dialectic of consciousness. For consciousness being had the character of the object and basically meant the simple “presence” of this object to the immediacy of sensible-intelligible knowing. Now, however, the result is that the object of consciousness is not the universal which is merely present and hovering above the particular. This universal is not at all what is truly immutable and permanently self-subsisting.* At first this universal revealed itself as “unconditioned universal,” as the “inner difference,” as “absolute concept,” as the universal which is no longer relative to its particulars. Already near the end of Section A Hegel says: “the absolute concept is the simple essence of life.”9

Why suddenly here the talk about “life”? Aristotle has already responded to this question in his treatise on the essence of life: τό δέ ζήν τοῖς ζώσι τὸ εἶναι ὲστιν.10 Life is a manner of being. Thus, we understand why, in developing the genuine concept of being, there can emerge the term life. Hegel himself already uses the term life in a special sense in his Theologische Jugendschriften.11 There Hegel states unequivocally: “pure life is being.”12 Still, why is it “life” that stands for genuine being in the Phenomenology? To grasp this, we must again go back to Aristotle: ζωὴν δὲ λέγομεν τὴν δι’ αὑτοῦ τϱοϕήν τε ϰαὶ αὔξησιν ϰαὶ ϕϑίσιν.13 Here the determination δι’ αὑτοῦ is crucial; self-preservation and growth and decline through itself. And we must bear in mind that these determinations, which easily appear to us as worn-out and insipid, at that time required an unprecedented exertion in order to be seen purely in themselves in terms of the phenomena. Later Hegel once said, and with justice: “Aristotle’s books On the Soul, with his treatises on special aspects and conditions of the soul, are still … the most excellent or the only work on this subject which is of speculative interest.”14

Life means the being which produces itself from out of itself and maintains itself in its movement. From this we understand to what extent genuine being is called “life.” It is a determination in view of which the essence of this being can be “characterized”;15 for this is what matters most. The “inner difference,” the “unconditioned universality,” refer to that being in which all the differences are not extinguished but are sublated and maintained in their origin. Unity is “self-repose as absolutely self-subsisting infinity.”16 Being is grasped as self-subsisting independence. Therefore, Hegel maintains: “Being no longer has the significance of abstract being {like the sphere of objectivity of consciousness}, nor has their pure essentiality the significance of abstract universality; on the contrary their being is precisely that simple, fluid substance of pure movement within itself.”17*

And now without preparation, as if self-evident—right in the middle of the elucidation of the concept of being, where he offers the first comprehensive definition of this concept—Hegel adds in apposition “the simple essence of time, which, in this equality with itself, has the pure shape of space.”18 At first sight this is strange, and yet basically it is not. This concise proposition, which is not further explained, is, it is true, not readily intelligible by itself alone. But this proposition is one of those many compressed statements made in the Phenomenology which are the results of entire treatises and investigations written in the Jena period, and through which, as frequently noted, insights are given. That is the case here. This sentence from the Phenomenology, which stands entirely isolated, reproduces what in the manuscript from the Jena period is treated on pages 202–214.19 And what is the theme there? Motion within the thematic of the solar system, which is the basic theme of the philosophy of nature.

It must be pointed out emphatically that, from the beginning and throughout his entire philosophy, time and space are for Hegel primarily problems of the philosophy of nature; this conforms entirely with the tradition. And whenever Hegel speaks about time in connection with the problematic of history and even of spirit, this happens each time in a formal displacement of the concept of time beyond the philosophy of nature into the realms of history and spirit. Conversely, the problematic of time is not primarily developed in terms of history and even spirit, for the simple reason that this would run as counter to Hegel’s basic intention as anything could.

After I myself had in the first place pointed to a remarkable connection in Hegel between time and the I, several repeated attempts have recently been made to prove that the problematic of “being and time” already exists in Hegel. This exercise is perfectly acceptable so long as the aim is energetically to find fault with my presumed originality. This business of degrading and belittling or, what is worse, of giving grudging recognition is for a long time now the chief pleasure of historians of philosophy. For this is also the easiest thing to do. By contrast, to see the positive aspect here, one must have already put in the effort of actual work, directed from the inner will. The energetic efforts to prove that Being and Time is an old story should be a wholesome and moderating factor for its author. This moral concern for the modesty of the author is entirely acceptable. It is, however, quite different and decisive whether with such devious tricks we do Hegel a favor or even honor him. This must, of course, be called into question. If reading the problematic of Being and Time into some other text is ever nonsensical, then this is the case with Hegel. For the thesis that the essence of being is time is the exact opposite of what Hegel tried to demonstrate in his entire philosophy. The Hegelian thesis is the reverse: Being is the essence of time—being, that is, as infinity. And this is exactly what is as clear as daylight in the passage in the Phenomenology that we just mentioned.20 The text there is concerned with life qua being in the sense of the “inner difference.” And it is stated: “The essence [Wesen] {the genuine being} is infinity as the sublatedness of all differences …,” and then Hegel says further: “the simple essence of time …,” which is to say that the essence of being is the essence of time. Or to speak in terms of time, we can say that time is one appearance of the simple essence of being qua infinity. And time has such an essence as being only insofar as time “has the pure shape of space.”

Conceived logically and thus really onto-logically, the essence of being is being-identical-with-itself in being-other. The egologically conceived essence of being is the “inner difference” as I = I, the relation to something which at the same time is not a relation. The theo-logically conceived being is spirit as absolute concept. In the light of this onto-ego-theo-logical concept of being qua infinity, time proves to be an appearance of being, in fact one which belongs to nature, “which is opposed to spirit as absolutely real.”21 (Cf. what is said about absolute matter, the basic essence of nature, and about ether: “The identity of ether with itself is infinite; and the manifestation [Ausdruck] of infinity only means that the ether does not have this infinity as an inner which is absolutely reflected in itself, without {thus} the movement of reflection nor—what is the same—as an exterior movement of reflection which is foreign to ether, i.e., does not have infinity in itself at all in this manner.”22 The moments of ether—as this alien and external element—and its motion are space and time. Accordingly, time is what is alienated from the absolute and thus from the essence of being itself.)

Just as the abstract being of the objectivity of consciousness is without spirit, so is time an appearance of being in that sphere which is void of spirit. But insofar as what is void of spirit is also determined in its nature as spirit, time can and must be grasped by the formalized concept of absolute being. But this means the extent to which spirit itself, if it has to exist, must fall into time is simultaneously rendered intelligible. The actual being can enjoin the form of inauthentic being, not because time is the essence of being, but the other way around: because being is the essence of time and hence is capable of appearing in time and as time—and indeed only because the time itself is referred to space in order to become an appearance of absolute being.

Therefore, we have to say that Hegel, in keeping with his entire view of time, not only has treated time in the proximity of space (like the entire tradition before him since Aristotle) but also has intensified this proximity still more in that he connected the essence of time essentially with the essence of space, so that time exists only as space and vice versa. This is clearly explicated in the manuscripts from the Jena period. The same view is expressed in the brief mention of time which occurs in this passage of the Phenomenology. We really understand this passage only if we read it integrally and if we grasp what is stated here, namely, that the true essence of being, infinity, is the essence of time, which has the shape of space.

We must forego here an interpretation of the essence of time in Hegel’s manuscripts on the philosophy of nature from the Jena period. Only one thing should be pointed out here: For Hegel the former time, the past, constitutes the essence of time. This corresponds to the fundamental view of being according to which what is a genuine being is what has returned to itself. If this is understood absolvently, then it means that being is what has already occurred, in the face of which nothing can be earlier, and everything always comes later or too late. (The a priori as the original past, as what is antecedent and simply prior to time and thus beyond time, as what is in advance, prior, reposed in itself, as the past which has become quiet.)

Time and space can here be connected with the true essence of being, since, in keeping with the course of the Phenomenology, the essence of being experiences its initial, preparatory, and most external determination in the transition from the alienated objectivity of consciousness. The reference of the essence of being as it encounters its initial externalization should help to prepare and initiate the transition into the interior and genuine essence of being, which is selfhood as spirit.

To summarize in the form of theses, we can say: For Hegel, being (infinity) is also the essence of time. For us, time is the original essence of being. These are not theses which can be simply played against each other antithetically. Rather, the term essence [Wesen] says something fundamentally different each time, precisely because being is understood differently. For essence is only a consequence of the understanding of being and its concept.

(Philosophy is unfortunately not so easy that one simply picks up something called Being and Time and then subsequently moves around at random in the history of philosophy, in order to flush out similarities as proof that the matter has already been said a long time ago. It is characteristic of this posture that precisely at that juncture—where in fact the problematic of “being and time” flares up for the first and only time, namely, in Kant—people refuse to see the problem and speak rather of my arbitrarily reading my own views into Kant. There is something peculiar about the lack of understanding in our contemporaries by virtue of which one can become famous all of a sudden, and indeed in a dubious sense. Fame is not only the ridiculous way we are honored nowadays by being bandied about everywhere. Fame also has hidden tricks of its own, which R. M. Rilke once stated in the following way: “For in the end fame is only the sum total of all misunderstandings that gather around a new name.”23)

If I may speak further about Being and Time, then I would say that it is not an advertisement for a new panacea which one could or should try out, but is the name for a task, for a way of working whereby we can perhaps once again become worthy of venturing a confrontation with real philosophy in its core. This does not mean negating philosophy, but rather affirming its greatness by actually understanding it.

Hegel’s explication of the genuine concept of being—in the passage just indicated, where time is mentioned—is nothing less than leaving time behind on the road to spirit, which is eternal.

The essence of being is life, the restlessness which reposes in itself, the independence of being-for-itself,24 which in its fluidity contains the division of individual forms in itself by continually taking these forms back into this independence from out of disunity. Such “circulation” is the essence of life, and its moments may now be more closely differentiated.

The first moment is the persistence of independent forms. This means a denial of differentiation. For by itself differentiating is nothing other than becoming related to something, being held in relation to something, being not by itself and having no persistence.

Conversely, the second moment is the subjugation of that persistence by the infinity of the difference.

Hegel shows that each of these two moments of life is turned into its opposite, so that four moments of life thus result: (1) immediate continuity, (2) the individually persisting form, (3) the universal process of these forms as such, and (4) the simple summary of the three moments just mentioned. However, life does not consist in the immediate summation of these four moments, but rather is “the self-developing whole which dissolves its development and in this movement simply preserves itself.”25 This unity of the whole, which results from the movement itself, is the higher and genuine unity of life and is thus other than the immediate unity. But this higher unity does not get split off for itself, as it were, as a result which persists for itself. Rather, life in its higher unity refers to what is the higher of the high, wherein everything is sublation, sublation to a knowing which must now be life itself and independence. This other life is self-consciousness; and it is unfolded by being guided by the moments of life that were presented and that are grasped as moments only if they are taken back into the circular movement.

1. II, 132 [GW IX, 103; Hoff., 134; E.T., 104].

2. II, 56 [GW IX, 48; Hoff., 57; E.T., 43].

3. II, 139 [GW IX, 108; Hoff., 140; E.T., 110].

4. II, 139–40 [GW IX, 108–109; Hoff., 140; E.T., 110–11].

1. II, 131–40 [GW IX, 103–109; Hoff., 133–41; E.T., 104–111].

2. II, 133 [GW IX, 104; Hoff., 135; E.T., 105].

3. II, 160 [GW IX, 122; Hoff., 160; E.T., 127].

4. II, 139 [GW IX, 108; Hoff., 140; E.T., 110].

5. II, 175 [GW IX, 133; Hoff., 176; E.T., 140].

6. II, 175ff. [GW IX, 132ff.; Hoff., 175ff; E.T., 139ff.]

7. Cf. above, pp. 77f., 102ff., 116ff.

8. II, 178f. [GW IX, 135; Hoff., 179; E.T., 142f.].

*[Because of a printing error, this sentence was wrongly typeset in the original German. We are grateful to Prof F.-W. von Herrmann for providing us with the correct formulation, which reads: “Der Gegenstand des Bewusstseins ist nicht das nur vorschwebende und über seinem Einzelnen schwebende Allgemeine; dieses ist noch ganz und gar nicht das wahrhaft unwandelbare beständige lnsichständige.”]

9. II, 126 [GW IX, 99; Hoff., 125; E.T., 100].

10. De Anima, B 4, 415 b 13.

11. Hegels theologische Jugendschriften ed. Nohl, “Der Geist des Christentums und sein Schicksal,” pp. 302 ff. [trans. T. Knox as Early Theological Writings (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1977), pp. 253ff.].

12. Ibid., p. 303 [E.T., p. 254].

13. De Anima, B 1, 412 a 14.

14. VII 2, 6 [trans. Philosophy of Mind, Paragraph 378, p. 3]

15. II, 136 [GW IX, 105; Hoff., 136; E.T., 106].

16. Ibid.

17. II, 134f. [GW IX, 105; Hoff., 136; E.T., 106f.].

*[The word “their” (ihre) refers to “the differences” (die Unterschiede) which Hegel mentions just prior to the passage cited by Heidegger.]

18. Ibid.

19. Jenenser Logik, ed. Lasson, pp. 202–214 [GW VII, 193–205].

20. II, 134 [GW IX, 105; Hoff., 136; E.T., 106].

21. Jenenser Logik, ed. Lasson, p. 187 [GW VII, 179].

22. Ibid., p. 202 [GW VII, 193].

23. Rilke, Auguste Rodin, 1903, WW IV, 299 [trans. G. C. Houston, Selected Works, vol. I (London: Hogarth Press, 1967), p. 95].

24. Regarding the problem of independence, cf. above, pp. 136ff.

25. II, 137 [GW IX, 107, Hoff., 138; E.T., 108].

 
    