# Chapter Three

Force and Understanding

§10. The absolute character of cognition

a) Absolute cognition as ontotheology

Speculative mediation is the way of absolvent knowing. The former, which is, as it were, determinately related to the mediating middle, is already reaching out for a possible mediation and for that toward which the mediated is mediated. Thus, in the course of the mediation—which each time begins with what is not mediated—that unto which it is being mediated is for the first time ascertained through the middle term. What is to be ascertained as such through mediation is speculative truth. What is mediated is the true as it is actually attained by speculative knowing and is what is truly ascertained and is that to which the mediation actually belongs.

Hence, absolvent cognition proceeds in three stages. The threefold character of the stages results from conceiving speculative knowing absolvently and logically. More precisely, what is logical—or proper to λόγος—is initially the simple determination of something as something: a is b. Herein the relation of b to a is posited as its determinateness. Thus, the logical relation is one-sided. However, one-sidedness is the sworn enemy of the totality, the absolute; for it will not be eliminated by merely positing the other side in addition. So what does “removal of the one-sided relation” mean primarily? It means above all the reverse: that the relation of a is shown to be that of a to b. But with this what is posited is not only two different and in each case one-sided relations, but the opposition of both in themselves. However, as oppositional, they point beyond to what is not one of the two one-sided relations, each taken for itself, or what is extant alongside them as a detached third, but to that which, as a higher absolute unity, supports them in their very opposition.

In the simple proposition, a is b, the is is stated. But this “is,” being [Sein], obtains its actual, true, and absolute meaning only as the speculative “is,” which is stated in mediation. However, the “simple,” one-sided proposition does not by itself reach the speculative form unless the term is is given in advance the meaning, not of a one-sided, but of a sublated-sublating unity. This unity as the unity which sublates all dissension, and along with it all unhappiness, is the absolute as happiness. It unties the entanglement and appeases the conflict. Happiness, entangling, untying, and redeeming—these are determinations which resonate in Hegel’s concept of the absolute. What is happy in this sense, what reconciles, is the true being [Seiendes]; and it is according to its being that all beings are determined in their being.

Ontology is the speculatively conceived and thus speculatively grounded interpretation of being, but in such a way that the actual being [Seiendes] is the absolute ϑεός. It is from the being [Sein] of the absolute that all beings and the λόγος are determined. The speculative interpretation of being is onto-theo-logy. This expression is not only meant to say that philosophy is guided by theology or even that philosophy is theology, in the sense of the concept of a speculative or rational theology, which we already discussed at the beginning of this lecture course. In this respect Hegel himself at a later date says in one place: “For philosophy, too, has no other object than God—and thus is essentially rational theology—and service to God in its continual service to truth.”1 We know also that Aristotle already brought philosophy in the genuine sense in very close connection with ϑεολογιϰή ἐπιστήμη, without being able to explain by a direct interpretation what the relationship is between the question concerning ὄν ἦ ὄν and the question of ϑεῖον.

With the expression “ontotheology” we mean that the problematic of ὄν—as a logical problematic—is guided from beginning to end by ϑεός, which is itself conceived “logically”—logically in the sense of speculative thinking. “But without knowing at least something of the concept of the concept, without at least having a representation, nothing can be grasped of the essence of God or of spirit as such.”2 According to the matter at issue, it is the essence of God as spirit in general that pre-scribes the essence of the concept and thus the character of the logical.

Hegel once wrote the following in a “theological” manuscript of his early period (“The Spirit of Christianity and Its Destiny”): “God cannot be taught and cannot be learned, because he is life and can only be grasped through living.”3 No matter how immense the transformations are that Hegel underwent—with no consideration for himself—up until the time of the Phenomenology of Spirit, no matter how different his overall attitude from which that statement originated is, there is in principle no difference between what is said later in the lecture course given in Berlin (“On the Proofs for the Existence of God”) and the earlier statements. For “concept” here is not simply the crude idea of traditional logic—the meaning of a universal (the species) in relation to many individuals—but rather the absolute self-comprehending of knowledge, which Hegel later still designates as life. In the same way the later concept of the concept is also basically “logical,” but absolutely logical. To understand something of the essence of God means to understand the truly logical character of the logos, and vice versa.

That the Hegelian concept is the sublated concept of traditional logic—which serves as the guideline for ontology—is shown, however, in the same way: The essence of God for Hegel is what presents itself finally in the specifically Christian consciousness of God, in the form in which it has passed through Christian theology and above all through the doctrine of the trinity—which dogma of Christian theology is inconceivable without ancient metaphysics.

Hence, with our expression “onto-theology” we refer in various ways to the primary relation of the basic problem to the ancient inquiry into beings, which has its basis in the λόγος (cf. my basic position on traditional “logic”). This title has been interpreted to mean that I wanted to expel and eliminate the logical from philosophy; it is now becoming customary to say that my philosophy is “mysticism.” It is both superfluous and useless to defend oneself against this; we mention these opinions only by way of explanation. “Whatever is not logical is mystical; whatever is not ratio is irrational.” To say this is only to show that one does not understand anything about the problem and has not made it clear to oneself or really questioned why and with what justification ὄν is related to λόγος. Is it so obvious then? The use made of the word ontology is characteristic of the fact that today one does not yet feel the inner necessity of this basic question of philosophy. In this usage, which was in part introduced in the nineteenth century and after that by present-day phenomenology—and circulated above all by Nicolai Hartmann—“ontological” means an attitude which allows beings per se to stand as completely independent of any subject. Thus, “ontological” means the same as “realistic.” If one understands “ontology” and “ontological” in this way, then they serve even less as a title for a real problem than they did in traditional metaphysics, which at least still had a conception of ontology that inherently and in certain of its intentions overlapped with ancient philosophy. Today everything has fallen victim to superficiality and to merely working with philosophical schools and slogans.

With respect to the title “Being and Time,” one could speak of an ontochrony. Here χϱόνος stands in the place of λόγος. But were both of these only interchanged? No. On the contrary, what matters is to unfold everything anew from the ground up, by taking over the essential motive of the question of being. It is important to show—formulating it with Hegel—that it is not the concept which is “the power of time,”4 but it is time which is the power of the concept. (We should, of course, note that by “time” Hegel certainly understands something different from what we do: He basically understands time as nothing other than the traditional concept of time that was developed by Aristotle.)

The expression “onto-theo-logy” should not point to a connection with a discipline called “theology,” but should indicate to us the most central thrust of the problem of being. The logical is theological, and this theological logos is the λόγος of the ὄν, whereby the term logical means at the same time “speculative-dialectical,” proceeding in the three steps of mediation.

The outcome of such a mediation, a speculative truth, is certainly a genuine one only if this truth is not isolated again and placed on the side, in order to be delivered, handed over, and offered as a result. On the contrary, as speculative truth it is by itself under the direction and dictates of a mediation which now sublates it, and so on. The expression “and so on” should not be taken in the sense of an unlimited continuation. Rather, we should note what is already posited in speculative cognition: the absolute, in which the manner, the extent, and the range of the first point of departure and of the concluding sentence of speculation (which returns to that starting point) are determined.

We can also regard what is expressed here in Hegel in such a way that we say that being is here determined as infinity. Being is not the infinite itself. Rather, “being is infinity” means that in the speculative proposition being carries the fundamental meaning of being posited. If, by contrast, we say “being is finitude,” this does not indicate a simple antithesis, as if we wanted to maintain—against Hegel—that being is being-posited in the simple proposition a is b. Rather, interpreting “being is finitude” in the same formal way, we can say that being is the horizon of ecstatic time. With this reference I want only to say not only that, compared with Hegel’s interpretation, our interpretation of being is a different one in terms of content, but also that the basic thrust of the interpretation itself—in terms of logos and time—is fundamentally different. Thus, it is not a simple or formal either-or. A philosophical debate simply cannot be reduced to such an “either-or.” With this reference we wanted only to have indicated from which dimension we come when we meet Hegel in the question of being.

At this juncture of the interpretation—in the transition to “Force and Understanding”—it was appropriate to recall the problem and the character of absolute cognition. Why just at this point will be shown immediately. The discussion of speculative cognition was deliberately carried out in a formal way, and so nothing was said about the inherent character of its object. “The science” means for Hegel absolute cognition and knowledge; and science is only as absolute knowledge in and as system. The system has two parts—more precisely, it is communicated and presented in two versions. The first is the science of the phenomenology of spirit; and its object is speculative dialectical cognition: knowledge. The second is the science of logic, which presents just this absolute knowledge in which what constitutes for it the entirety of those determinations through which whatever is speculatively known is to be known in advance. To put it externally, the science of logic presents the categorial content of what is known of the absolutely knowable. But the modes of absolute knowledge and the manner in which something is known in these modes are not two separate items, but one and the same and belong together. This one whole that is absolute knowledge is the object of speculative cognition. This is to say that this object does not stand opposed to speculative cognition as a second object; but rather, this object is cognition itself, absolute self-consciousness, spirit.

b) The unity of the contradiction of the thing in its essence as force

The first object of the phenomenology of spirit is consciousness, the knowledge which initially relates immediately to its object as the other of itself, without knowing that the object is the other when considered against the self of consciousness. Immediate consciousness (sense certainty) is thereby thematized as knowledge of its object and is correspondingly designated by the names “this” and “intending.” What evolves out of sense certainty as its opposite is perception, which is also characterized, correspondingly, by the two expressions “thing” and “deception.” As a designation for the perceiving knowledge, the expression “deception” is used, in order to indicate—and it should be clear from the preceding—the reflexive, self-deceiving character of perception, and to make clear that the taking of the true is no longer a blind seizing but an accepting unto itself, a certain going-into-itself of knowing. The speculative mediation of sense certainty and of perception yields the first speculative truth of the Phenomenology: the absolvent cognition of knowing as consciousness. This knowing is under standing, and Hegel designates its object with the initially strange expression “force.”

The truth of the this is the thing, and the truth or essence of the thing is force. The this of sense certainty is the particular; the thing of perception is the universal, the universal which is determined by something other than itself, by the particular, as to what it is. The particular conditions the universal of the thing. Its universality is a conditioned one, and hence—because it is related to an other beside itself—it is finite, not absolute. Now, the universal, however, is the true of the object of immediate knowing. But this true is really true only when it is not a finite conditioned universal, but an unconditioned absolute universal. Hegel designates as force this unconditioned universal, which does not have the particular beside or under itself but in itself and itself unfolds necessarily into particulars. This designation, and even more the essence of the thing so designated, is not readily intelligible. In order to see clearly here, the general context must be recorded. I shall develop this context above all historically; the inherent and thus essentially packed context will unfold from out of the interpretation of the third part of Section A.

Force is the essence of the thing. Accordingly, it is a question of the determination of the essence of extant beings—speaking in terms of the tradition of metaphysics, which here as well as everywhere is determinative for Hegel, without his speaking extensively about it. These are initially particular things, subsisting and inhering in themselves, the so-called substances. The substantiality of the substance expresses how the thing is extant as what it is. According to the traditional terminology, it expresses the manner of its existence—in Kant’s terms, the character of its existence, its actuality. How then—as a historical question—does Hegel come to bring the problem of the essence of actuality of the thing under the title “force”?

In the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant opened up the problem of an ontology of nature—the question of how to determine, in an essentially appropriate manner, extant and accessible beings as to what and how they are. The determinations of the being of beings are called “categories.” Kant calls by the name “mathematical” the categories which determine the whatness of things extant, their essentia, their possibility. He calls “dynamic” those categories which determine how things are in actuality. Δύναμις is here what is effective, or force. According to Kant, the first group of dynamic categories comprises the following three:

1. Inherence and subsistence (substantia et accidens)

2. Causality and dependence (cause and effect)

3. Community (reciprocity between agent and patient).

It is clear that two categories are always mentioned here, but not simply numerically two—rather, two in relation to each other. That is why Kant places this first group of the dynamic categories under the general title “relation.”

Hegel already took account of the first relation—substantia and accidens—with the corresponding transformation in the interpretation of the thinghood of the thing as object of perception. And now one could assume that the object of understanding would be the next dynamic category as the truth of the thing, the category of causality. This category is mentioned in Hegel’s discussion, but at the same time everything stands under the designation of “force,” a category which Kant does not know in this form and function. And yet the Hegelian determination of the truth of the thing or of substance as force shows precisely how with it the Kantian problem of the dynamic categories is first genuinely grasped from the ground up and speculatively penetrated.

Therefore, it is not at all an adequate understanding to say that Hegel took from Kant in a certain way the categorial determination of the essence of the thing as force. This statement is correct; but as long as it remains only correct, it does not say anything. One can fill volumes with statements about what Aristotle took from Plato, Descartes from the Scholastics, Kant from Leibniz, and Hegel from Fichte. But this pretentious and presumptuous precision of historical statements is not only superficial. (If it were only that, it could be left quietly to its unsurpassable self-satisfaction and harmlessness.) It is also misleading. Such historical explanation pretends to state how things have really been in philosophy, without itself having been touched in the least by the actuality of philosophizing. Our statement that the Hegelian determination of the essence of the thing as force goes back to Kant is correct, but does not say anything. It would not say any more even if we would try to explain the meaning of the concept of force for the substantiality of the substance by looking back to Leibniz or looking ahead to the effect on Hegel of Schelling’s philosophy of nature and his System of Transcendental Idealism of 1800. What matters is to see how Hegel took up and penetrated all these issues and transformed them into his problematic—“his” understood not in terms of personal intellectual production, but his as the material completion and unfolding of what came earlier.

I have already emphasized the broad basis of the investigations upon which the Phenomenology of Spirit rests and have indicated that we do have some insight into that basis through manuscripts from the Jena period. When circumscribing the concept of infinity, I indicated that the Jena period was, among other things, taken up with a confrontation with Kant’s doctrine of categories. But Kant had set up the table of categories on the basis of the table of the forms of judgment, the modes of logos. Therefore, by critically working his way toward a more comprehensive beginning, Hegel too develops the speculative interpenetration of the categories in the “logic.” At that time he still distinguished logic from metaphysics, although for him “logic” had already taken on an entirely different form from that of traditional scholastic logic. It took the form of a logic which was really carried through in transcendental terms, wherein Fichte had already preceded him. Hegel too conceives the threefold of substantiality, causality, and reciprocity with the title of what he calls, terminologically, Verhältnis [relation]. Verhältnis is a very definite speculative concept. It is for Hegel not simply an indifferent title that merely indicates what is common to it, being unconcerned with whatever is subsumed under it—as it is for Kant. Hegel develops the so-called categories in terms of the essence of relation; he uncovers the essence of relation through this development. This whole speculative development is carried out under the guidance of the concept of “force.”

“Force itself {expresses} the idea of relation.”5 The speculative thrust of the concept of force is relation—relation itself therefore comprehended speculatively. If we attempt to visualize such a concept of relation, then we see that relation is nothing other than the unconditioned, absolute universal, which does not have the particulars indifferently under it, but has and holds the particulars within itself and is their unity and ground. Relation is no longer the indifferent connection which, so to speak, is accidentally drawn over the items connected; rather, it is the holding which as such “relates” the items, holds them in such a way that they can be what they are. The members of the relationship are defined in terms of this “relating.” But force as relation should also not be identified with causal relation; rather, force expresses this only along with it: “The concept of force rises above … the causal connection; force unifies in itself both the essential aspects of the relation: being-identical and being-separate, the former as the identity of being-separated or of infinity.”6

But what is sought is the unconditioned universal, insofar as the conditioned universal, as the truth of the thing of perception, is to be sublated in the unconditioned universal as the object of understanding. If relation is the object of understanding under the title “force,” then understanding as a mode of knowing of this object is speculatively determined along with it as infinite, and the intelligible, finite conception of understanding in Kant is overcome. Therefore, Hegel says that for understanding the principle is the “unity that is in itself universal”7—not the unity that ensues from the connection of two independent extremes, but the unity which itself unfolds into that which unifies the two and, as unifying, is their relation—to such an extent that the unified are themselves the relation.

Whereas for Kant the presentation and arrangement of the table of categories was guided by the already-made table of judgments, put together from many undeveloped elements in the tradition, for Hegel (1) the table of judgments becomes problematical (because the proposition as such becomes questionable), and (2) the speculatively oriented determination of the essence of the judgment and its possibilities turns out to be the speculative origin of the categories themselves.8 Thus, the Kantian treatment of the connection between judgment and categories is taken up by Hegel in a genuinely philosophical manner and developed anew from out of an independent problematic. However, the connection between the judgment (λόγος) and the categories is that connection which has always been vital since antiquity and catches the eye if we consider that the basic form of the λέγειν of the λόγος is ϰατηγοϱεῖν.

For Kant in the Critique of Pure Reason, especially in the second edition, understanding is not only that which determines what is given and is determinable in intuition—is not only determinative [bestimmende] in the sense of being at the service of intuition—but is also determinative in the manner of the dominant element of cognition. But cognition is cognition of what is extant, of nature, of things, of the manifold of individual items which are manifest to us in their general existence. But for Hegel it is precisely the task of a speculative interpretation of consciousness to develop the essence of thinghood in terms of the this and in turn to develop the thinghood of perception into the object of understanding, an understanding which thinks the thing as substance, causality, and reciprocity—as relation. The title for relation is the expression “force.”

This is how we understand the title of the third part, “Force and Understanding,” from out of the historical context of the problem of the Phenomenology.

c) Finite and absolute cognition—“Appearance and the Supersensible World”

The title of the third part still contains the words appearance and supersensible world. We readily infer from these titles a further relation to Kant and to his distinction between appearance and thing in itself (the intelligible object, the intelligible as counter-concept to what is “sensible”). But, of course, the Kantian concepts cannot simply be transposed here under Hegelian titles; rather, these Hegelian expressions must be developed in terms of the problem of the concept of force. On the other hand, the Kantian terms appearance and thing in itself are also not self-evident concepts, but rather need to be explicated in terms of the guiding problem of the Critique of Pure Reason, which is the guiding question of metaphysics. Let me here refer to what I say in my book on Kant.* I assume at this point that what I said in that work is understood and now mention only one thing: The distinction between appearance and thing in itself is rooted in the distinction between finite and infinite (absolute) cognition. Now, when in the heading of the third part of Section A Hegel mentions the difference between appearance and supersensible world, this indicates that, along with the speculative interpretation of the object of understanding as force, at the same time the step is taken from finite, relative knowing to the realm of absolute knowledge and that the first manifestation of reason, of the absolute, is accomplished. Or, as Hegel puts it at the conclusion of the entire Section A (which deals with consciousness): “This curtain {the appearance as naively understood} is therefore … drawn away {namely, from the absolute}.”9 With this step, however, the absolute is not simply to be stared at, as if it were present on a stage, because the speculative comprehension now first begins.

Therefore, the phenomenology of spirit as consciousness, as the manifestation of the truth of consciousness in understanding as such, has a central historical and factual significance for Hegel, (1) in the sense of a confrontation with the one-sided philosophies of understanding and of reflection, which are stuck in the finitude of logos and understanding, so that in the face of this finitude the task arises of bringing the understanding to reason, and so comprehending the understanding absolutely, and (2) in the sense of preparing the explicit grounding of the absolute position of idealism.

Whereas the first part of the title—“Force and Understanding”—simply indicates the third form of consciousness in view of what is known in it and in view of the manner of knowing, the second part of the title—“Appearance and the Supersensible World”—expresses how, by having appearance as its object, understanding precisely goes beyond the sensible world, the world of the senses. This should be taken to mean not only that understanding as a mode of consciousness sublates sense certainty as the immediate mode of consciousness, but essentially something more than that. Sense certainty as the knowing of the this is still—albeit sublated—in the thing as object of perception, as also in the object of understanding. Wherever there is still consciousness, wherever the known is an other for knowing (and not its other), there is sensibility. The character of sensibility encompasses all three modes of consciousness; and just because of this, these modes are all of one essence: relative knowledge. When in understanding the transition beyond sensibility toward what is supersensible begins, then understanding is at the same time the mode of consciousness which raises itself above itself by sublating sense certainty and perception. Put more precisely, the raising of understanding above itself becomes manifest by and in the history of the sublation of consciousness but without yet being specifically accomplished through knowing itself.

Given these indications as to the central role of the concepts of “appearance” and of the “supersensible world” and their connection with the problem of understanding, it would be appropriate to characterize these concepts briefly before offering a thematic interpretation of the third part of Section A. At this point this can be done only in an external report. For this purpose, we begin with the naive explication of the difference between the sensible and the supersensible world which was still current in Kant’s and Hegel’s time and of which Kant gave a certain metaphysical formulation with his Critique of Pure Reason, without further making this explication explicitly problematical. Hegel’s critique of Kant also takes its bearing from this the usual interpretation.

Things as we represent them, the appearances, are in this interpretation something like a string of extant things. Similar to the way in which we represent the appearances, we represent what is supersensible as what is extant behind the appearances. The fact that this background is not accessible to our sensible representation means only that accessibility is thought of as a representing that fundamentally has the same character as the representing of sensible things—the only difference being that it goes further and gets behind the things of the senses. Thus, appearances are present at hand, and in their interior there is again something present at hand. Taking his bearing from this the usual representation, Hegel speaks frequently, and in a certain sense terminologically, of an inner, whereby the inner certainty has a deliberate orientation to the inner in the sense of the interiority of the subject. For the moment we will not explain further how this the usual view is not that of Kant.

But when Hegel now attributes to consciousness—and thus to some extent to Kant—this way of apprehending the relation between appearance and the thing in itself, then in his speculative critique he arrives simultaneously at connections which, while not identical with the real intentions of Kant, still do justice to them. Hegel rightfully emphasizes that there are no appearances for themselves, nor is there anything that for itself may be called appearance. Appearance, taken as appearance, is the appearing of something other than itself. Insofar as what appears is what primarily and immediately shows itself, as this self-showing it shows what appears in its own way. Appearance as what shows itself—what appears as the emerging view—is, namely, an other, above all and actually this other. What appears as the self-showing which shows the other is the immediate; and, as what shows the other, it is at the same time mediating. And so the concept of appearance again jumps into the specifically speculative character of the objectivity of knowing as such. But even with that we have not yet grasped a single basic character of the Hegelian concept of appearance, which shows first of all how Hegel relates this concept, as the concept of a being, to his speculative concept of being in general.

That which appears is related as mediator to what is to be ascertained. But the latter taken speculatively is always the higher and the genuine truth. Therefore, when Hegel takes appearance as appearance, he must necessarily comprehend the supersensible world which the appearance shows as the true of appearance, in which the appearance itself is sublated. From this the further point follows—and it is decisive for the Hegelian interpretation of the concept of appearance—that appearance as what appears is not only that which shows itself. To show itself is to rise up. Appearing means arriving or coming, and not-appearing means staying away. Thus, taken as a whole, appearing means rising up and disappearing. With this we grasp the specific character of movement in appearing. Thus, appearance is taken in its specifically dialectical character and in this way attains its suitability as a basic speculative concept whose significance is expressed by its position in the title of the work: appearance, phenomenon, phenomenology. Consequently, appearing means rising up in order to disappear again, disappearing in order thereby to make room for another, for something higher. It means the affirmation and negation in transition, to which we referred when we defined the concept of appearance in connection with the clarification of the title Phenomenology.10

Now, Kant is of the opinion that, insofar as and because what we experience is appearance, the object of our cognition is mere appearance. By contrast, Hegel says that, if appearance is what is primarily accessible to us, then our true object must be the supersensible. Once the phenomenal character of the objectivity of consciousness is posited, precisely then the knowability of the things themselves, of the supersensible world, is fundamentally proven. This is the way to understand the juxtaposition of “appearance” and “supersensible world” in the title. It says that they are not differentiated, but in the speculative sense are the same. “The supersensible is therefore appearance, as appearance.”11

However, it would be quite wrong to put Hegel’s thesis on the know-ability of the thing in itself on a par with the knowability, or rather unknowability, of the supersensible that is maintained by common sense—as though Hegel were affirming that the representing simply and immediately penetrates the curtain of appearance to what is hanging behind it. Rather, the phenomenal character of appearance is solely and in advance to be grasped speculatively-dialectically as the mediating middle. Here we come across a new characteristic of the “middle.” The ancient doctrine of λόγος as συλλογισμός (syllogism) already mentions a middle, μέσον. With this connection in mind, Hegel conceives the essence of appearance as a middle and at the same time conceives mediation as μέσον of a syllogism, whereby syllogism too is not supposed to be understood in the formal, logical sense of a simple deduction of propositions, but in the speculative sense of joining together in a higher unity, as synthesis of thesis and antithesis. The syllogism is what actually draws together, joins, as it were, two ends or extremes in such a way that the middle leads from one extreme to the other. And indeed, understanding, on the one hand, and the thing in itself, on the other, are supposed to be joined—truly grasped in their relatedness to each other and in their belonging together as the same.

Thus, appearance as that which joins together is the dovetailing middle and central segment of understanding as a mode of knowing which is constantly “our {absolved} object” in the Phenomenology. “Our object is thus from now on the syllogism, which has for its extremes the interior of things and the understanding and for its middle term appearance; but the movement of this syllogism yields the further determination of what understanding catches sight of in the interior of things through the middle term, also yielding the experience which understanding has of being joined in this relation.”12 And corresponding to that: “Raised above perception, consciousness presents itself as joined with the supersensible by means of the middle term of appearance, through which consciousness gazes into this background.”13

Two things should again be pointed out: (1) Catching sight of the interior of the thing in itself does not mean going directly behind appearance, as it were, through a back door, leading straight to the interior of the thing in itself. Rather, it always means going solely and precisely through appearance as a middle. Appearance must be grasped as appearance, as a middle. (2) This going through the appearance is therefore possible only where the middle as such is intelligible as mediation. But mediation is absolute knowledge itself. Only absolute cognition knows things in themselves.

Kant and Hegel share this conviction, the only difference being that Hegel claims that absolute knowledge is possible for us, whereas Kant denies to human beings the possibility of an ontic theoretical knowledge of the absolute. Certainly the absolute knowledge which Hegel claims is not to be put on a par with theoretical knowledge as it is usually understood; to this extent Hegel is like Kant, who from a practical point of view and intent also concedes that human beings can know the absolute. (It is superfluous to explain in detail how, when Hegel speaks of appearance as the middle term of a syllogism, he does not intend to claim that our knowledge of things themselves is a “syllogism” [Schluss] with whose help we infer [schliessen] the interior and the background from what lies at the exterior. This way of inference, which is often invoked today as a precondition for accessibility to the things in themselves, is the most superficial finite way of cognition—finite in the worst sense of the word—and is by no means the appropriate way for knowing the absolute. To give one example: I infer from the rising of smoke out of the chimney that there is fire in the house. But it is still dubious whether this is a syllogism at all, as is often claimed.)

For Hegel the thing in itself is truly accessible, but only when we are serious about absolute knowledge. But when the thing in itself is the object of absolute knowledge, then this object can no longer be that which stands over against us, that which by itself no longer stands over against absolute knowledge as alien or other. In such a case this knowledge would not be absolute. It would have no power at all over its known, but would be relative in the sense that was explained earlier. If the thing in itself is absolutely known and knowable, then it loses its oppositional character, becomes truly in itself, having the character of an itself or of a for-itself [ein Sichhaftes, Fürsichhaftes]. It defines itself as belonging to a self, which knows itself as itself. What we who know absolutely know as the thing in itself is what we ourselves are, but always as those who know absolvently. What is known absolutely can only be that which knowledge knowingly lets emerge and which, only as emerging thus, stands in knowing; it is not an object but an emergence, as I have said elsewhere.14 The correlate of absolvent knowing is this emergence. More exactly, emergence is no longer a correlate, because it is no longer relative—absolute knowledge is self-comprehension, or “concept.” Something that we let emerge in such knowing is not a relative ob-ject [Gegen-stand] but an absolute emergence [Ent-stand] which is maintained only in its emergence and as such in the history of absolute knowledge. What is absolutely knowable can never be an object but exists only as emergence, and as such stands in the emergence by means of knowledge itself. We ourselves, as those who know absolvently, bring the thing in itself to a stop. What we know in the thing in itself is our spirit.

Thus, if the supersensible is to be seen, we must ourselves go there, as we who know absolvently. We ourselves must go there, not only so that the access to the supersensible is really accomplished and so that seeing is accomplished in truth and absolutely, but also so that there is something there—something of ourselves as those who know absolutely—where we gaze knowingly. For only in this way is there the absolutely knowable—if the thing in itself is indeed absolutely knowable. In this sense Hegel emphasizes at the conclusion of the entire Section A, which deals with consciousness: “It is manifest that behind the so-called curtain which is supposed to conceal the interior of things there is nothing to be seen unless we go behind it ourselves, as much so that we may see as that there be something behind there which can be seen.”15 If the term “we” is grasped simply as a pronoun which indicates the readers who happen to come across the work in the full soundness of their common sense, then everything becomes totally absurd. Put the other way, it is crucial that this “we,” its meaning, and its role be meditated upon from the first sentence of the work and repeatedly thereafter.16

In the speculative experience of the essence of understanding, it turns out that its true object is the thing in itself, which is, however, something belonging to the self of self-consciousness. But because understanding presents itself now as consciousness—and can only present itself as such—and because it is not self-consciousness, understanding is incapable of recognizing itself in its true object. Understanding does recognize the thing in itself and is thus related to itness [Sichheit], but understanding is not capable of comprehending this itness as selfhood [Selbstheit]. Therefore, Hegel says: “To begin with, therefore, we must step into its place and be the concept which develops and fills out what is contained in the result. It is through this completely developed object, which presents itself to consciousness as a being, that consciousness first becomes explicitly a consciousness that comprehends.”17

As we know, already at the beginning of the Phenomenology Hegel says that “we” have to take our place in immediate knowledge, in consciousness, since otherwise the relative for itself would not move from the spot; it is indeed something peculiar to the relative to stick to its own place. But here, too, Hegel does not simply say again that we have to take the place of understanding (qua relative knowledge). Rather, he adds “to begin with,” by which he indicates that as soon as knowledge gets so far as to know itself absolutely, then “we” become superfluous. But that only means that the difference between a knowledge which does not yet know itself absolutely (but is basically still absolute knowledge) and one which knows absolvently vanishes insofar as the position of absolvence is itself alive for itself when knowledge which knows itself absolutely is reached.

Thereby the perspective of this section, which is so crucial for the entire work, should have become visible in its basic outline. This section offers the systematic presentation and justification of the transition of metaphysics from the Kantian foundations and problematic to that of German Idealism; it presents the transition from the finitude of consciousness to the infinity of spirit; and viewed in terms of the special problem of understanding, this section presents the transition from the negative determination of the thing in itself to its positive determination.

The task now is to follow the main steps and to go along with the movement in which understanding in its knowing relatedness to its object—coming from perception—sublates perception along with the sense certainty included in perception, in order to elevate itself and thus consciousness as a whole into the truth of consciousness, which is basically self-consciousness.

§11. The transition from consciousness to self-consciousness

a) Force and the play of forces: Being-for-itself in being-for-another

What is required now is to go along with the movement of understanding. What do we mean by this “going along”? We do not mean observing the procedures of something like the crude activity of understanding vis-à-vis an object as something roughly intuited. Rather, we mean following absolvently and intelligently the mutuality and multiplicity of the inner, essential relations of this mode of consciousness, which Hegel calls understanding, to the essence of what is known therein, and the other way around. Do we mean, consequently, “the dialectic of understanding”? Yes, but what does this dialectic mean? Should we now apply dialectic—the sequence of the three steps of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis—to understanding? But how? What is understanding, and what is its relation to what is known in it like?

Certainly, “dialectic” is a magnificent thing. But one never finds the dialectic, as if it were a mill which exists somewhere and into which one empties whatever one chooses, or whose mechanism one could modify according to taste and need. Dialectic stands and falls with the matter itself, just as Hegel took it up as the matter of philosophy. To speak more clearly, one cannot be enthusiastic about dialectic and involve oneself in the revival of Hegelian philosophy while at the same time pushing aside—with a wink of the eye and a pitiful smile—things like his Christianity, his Christology, and his doctrine of the Trinity. If one does this, then the whole of Hegelianism turns into a mendacious prattle; and Hegel himself becomes a ridiculous figure. In the present case, understanding is not our theme because we know something somehow about understanding and, in the dialectic, want to shuffle these known properties around and oppose them to one another. Rather, what understanding is is already determined in advance in the absolvent beginning and becomes visible through dialectic.

For Hegel the whole of knowledge—as every page of the Phenomenology shows—is anticipated in the absolvent construction which itself has received its genuine impulses from the inner history of the guiding problem of metaphysics. The task is to unfold from within this construction the modes of knowledge, each in terms of its own inherent content. Thus, we will see that perception is not so readily mediated to understanding—only to have something else leap out—but that the real work on a real, absolvent clarification of the essence of understanding confronts us. Even if we had no knowledge—from the manuscripts of the Jena period—of how often only a few concentrated sentences of the Phenomenology of Spirit rely on very extensive and penetrating investigations as their foundation, even if we did not know this, it would become clear from the wealth of relations which are articulated in the work.

Understanding, which is supposed to be our theme now, has already announced itself in the absolvent essence of perception as that which perceiving constantly resists insofar as it does not really concern itself with bringing together the essential determinations of its object. The object of perception is the thing. The thing as such is the thing which has many properties. The thinghood of the thing is that whatness of the particular this, the universal. This universal (thinghood) includes the following essential moments: the “also” of many properties and the one of the unity of the independent object, which we now call thing. The “also” and the one are reciprocally brought forward over against each other in perception and favored one-sidedly, although both belong with equal weight to the essence of perception. The one essential moment is the universal, which, however, is conditioned by the other essential moment. The universality is not an unconditioned one; the togetherness of both moments of the object—the “also” and the one—is not a real unity such that this unity could ground and support their separation. Rather, these moments simply go asunder. Only in the truly mediated unity of these moments, in their inner unity, would the universality be the unconditionally mediated simplicity, the absolute universal, and thus the truth of the object of consciousness.

It is important to examine whether and to what extent the object of understanding contains this unconditioned universality. The referral of the moments to the inner unity, in which the moments return into themselves, indicates that here there is a “reflection.” But this reflection exists only objectively for understanding as a mode of consciousness. Understanding hits upon the interior, but the latter must remain empty for understanding. Understanding does not know itself as that which in its object constitutes objectivity or this unconditioned universality. Since understanding is also a mode of consciousness and since, according to its own sense of knowing, it has its truth in the object, we must begin again with the question of the essence of understanding as the question concerning the essence and truth of its object.

In our anticipatory and largely external or historical elucidation of the title of the third section, we explained that the object of understanding is force. Now we must raise the essential question: To what extent does force have a connection with the objectivity of perception, and thus with an unbalanced breaking up of the “also” and the one, such that force at the same time constitutes the possible unity of what breaks up—in such a way that this unity is an unconditioned unity? Is there a movement in which the moments do not go asunder at all, but unfold while remaining in a unity, in order to return at once from the unfolding back to a unity? Such a movement would be a reciprocal transition. “But this movement is what is called force.”1

The proof of the thesis is presented in the following manner, which I now outline briefly by way of anticipation. We are dealing again with constructing the object of understanding (force) by proceeding from the common representation of it. What is required for the true actuality of the absolute essence of force must become visible in the absolvent construction.

Hegel proceeds from the universal, immediate representation of force. But the issue is not force as a representation in the sense of what is represented. Rather, the point is to show force as the truly actual in the actuality of things in themselves. But if we think of force in accordance with its conceptually predetermined essence as actual, then we are forced to assume two or more actual forces in each case. But then we fall back into the actuality of the object of perception, in the multiplicity of particular, extant things as they are in themselves. However, it becomes manifest that the multiplicity of two forces qua forces is possible only as a play of forces. The play between both forces is their genuine actuality. But play is a relation; and as explained in the logic of the Jena period, relation is the unconditioned universality. Thus, it is force which sublates—or, seen absolvently, does not permit—the breakup of the moments in the object of perception. Their separation is shown only to perception, which has not yet arrived at understanding. When seen from the viewpoint of absolvence, which has not lost understanding but has retained it in absolute knowledge, the separation of single forces is only the unfolded unity of something higher. We must now show this more concretely.

Taken simply, what is force? What do we mean when we immediately represent to ourselves force in general? A force confronts us in its externalization; externalizing itself, it breaks up, so to speak, in the manifold of what has been effected. It is here that we first come across force and become attentive to it. However, we genuinely represent force to ourselves when we take it for itself, as something withdrawn—or more exactly, driven back in itself from its possible externalization. But in this being-driven-back-into-itself there is at the same time a being-driven-toward-externalization—being tense, being drawn back into itself, being poised and ready. Force is both together at the same time: being-driven-back-into-itself as the drive-toward-externalization. And again, in its externalization, force remains in-itself as well; for it can externalize itself only as long as it remains in itself.

With that the inner connection with the preceding discussion is already announced. The externalization of force corresponds to the way in which the multiplicity of the “also” is spread out in the object-realm of perception. In the same way being-driven-back-into-itself over against a multiplicity of possible effects corresponds to the being-for-itself of the thing’s oneness. But force is both of these at once. Force is reflected in itself, driven back to itself, so much so that force as such pushes toward the outside, toward externalization—whereby it then exists for the other, on which it has an effect and which it effects. Force is being-for-itself and being-for-another.

But we have thus developed only the simple concept of force, and it might seem as though force is something for itself, something purely simple so that the difference which we made between being-for-itself and being-for-another would be only an imagined one, a difference which would be brought to the object only by our representation. Against this it is important to see—and this is Hegel’s second step—that in its actuality force itself is this difference between being-driven-back-into-itself and being-driven-to-ward-the-outside. This means that the externalization of force is not opposed to force and is not extant alongside force, occasionally stepping in as its realization—so that force would be only what is possible and not yet existing. On the contrary, force is just that in which the being-for-itself of what is driven back into itself and the being-for-another (the being of the other itself as such) have their subsistence at the same time. Force is the relation, identical with itself in its externalization. It is force which has externalized itself. What comes forward as an other upon which force has an effect and what looks as if it for its part enticed the force to manifestation, that is force itself, as the disquieting, the irritating (the solicitous). So this is the result: Where there is force or an actual effectual relationship, there are necessarily two forces, each one independent. And thus, by developing the concept of force—the speculative concept of force—we would have the same state of affairs as we had in perception, where the object is split into a multiplicity of independent things—“substantialized extremes” (partialities)—only with the difference that these things are now endowed with force. Thus, the characterization of the thing as force does not achieve what it is supposed to achieve. Force does not provide the sought-for absolute, self-relying unity of the things in themselves.

But is it then simply the case that, where the concept of force is actualized, necessarily two forces are actual, the solicited and the soliciting one? Certainly. But if force is actually real in the actuality of two forces, then both of these independent forces are not simply extant in the medium of the “also.” Rather, their actuality consists precisely in movement against each other. They force each other to disappear reciprocally into independence. This disappearance should not be taken naively as a thing-like event but must be understood speculatively, so that they remain together in taking effect but disappear as independent. One only has to be serious about the realization of force into forces in order to see that the forces are not extremes existing for themselves as extremes which, as Hegel says figuratively, “would transmit to one another in the middle term and in their contact a merely external property; on the contrary, what they are, they are only in terms of this middle and in this contact.”2 What is actual is the play of forces, and not individual forces as substances. The truth of force consists precisely in losing its actuality as “substantialized extreme.” What we sensibly and objectively represent as force, as dynamite on hand, as it were, is immediate and is the untrue. The true is the play, the middle, not the extremes—the middle which relates the extremes in their comportment to each other and is relation. The forces do not dispatch something, from each of them, into the middle lying indifferently between them. Rather, the forces are related precisely by the middle, such that only in this way they can be what they are. Force is in its actuality exactly as understanding had already represented it in its concept, the relation of being-for-itself in being-for-another, but that means the original, conditioning unity of the “one” and the “also” and thus the “true essence of things.”3 We see the essence of the thing4 through the middle of the play of forces; only through this mediation does consciousness arrive at things as they are themselves, at the supersensible. And this consciousness is the understanding.

b) The appearance of the play of forces and the unity of the law

How are we to grasp positively the mediated essence of the thing through the middle of the play of forces? First of all, what is the mediated middle itself which we come to know as the play of forces? Or: How is understanding related to the interior through mediation? What happens by way of this mediation? How does understanding unfold its essence, which indeed holds as its principle that for understanding the universal unity in itself is the true?

As has been frequently stated already, with this speculative interpretation of understanding Hegel has in mind the conception of understanding which determines the problematic of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason. Understanding is the faculty of concepts, of judging, of representing of something in general—as the faculty of rules—understanding as thinking which always unfolds as “I think.” But this “I think” is “I think unity,” or, as Kant says, “I think substance, causality, reciprocity, and so on.” I think the categories; or better formulated: I think categorially.

Categories are representations of unities which bind in advance the capacity of understanding to connect and to judge. In itself “I think” means to take a view toward the unity under whose guidance and regulation the act of connecting is carried out. Thus, the inner, essential interrelation of judgment and categories is indicated; and the essential ground for the inner unity of judgment and category is shown, as Kant put it in the Critique of Pure Reason. Though guided by this concept of understanding, Hegel develops it now speculatively. I think unity, a unity which does not depend on some kind of concrete collecting, but is an a priori, final unity. The principle for understanding is the universal unity in itself, a unity which constitutes the objectivity of its object.

The questions raised above turn knowing, which as understanding determines its object, into a speculative problem. The speculative characterization of the object of understanding as force has been carried so far up to this point that it became apparent that the actual, which understanding thinks in its knowing, is not made up of individual forces “which offer each other only an oppositional extreme.”5 Rather, the actual is the middle of these forces, the play of forces. What does this mean for force, which was initially taken up as an individual agent? The particular force vanishes in the play. The being of force is the vanishing, namely, the vanishing of what force at first pretended and seemed to be. In this vanishing the being of force is itself a non-being, a mere show which vanishes, so much so that something else emerges; this means that the mere show is appearing [Scheinen ist Erscheinen].

It is important to remember again that Hegel does not take the essence of appearing only as self-showing, as becoming manifest, as manifestation. Rather, appearing also means a mere-showing and vanishing. There is in appearance a moment of negativity, which is most intimately connected with the character of appearance as movement. But this means that appearance is not merely a showing, but that also in the vanishing something makes its appearance. What emerges is nothing other than what is retained in the arising and vanishing of the sensible, what is brought along with appearance in itself, the interior or the supersensible. At first we saw only that the play of forces (the appearing) is not in itself. Thus, there is in appearing a negative indication of the in-itself, of the enduring interior, whereby we simultaneously know positively that this interior becomes graspable only through mediation—that appearance as appearance returns itself into itself. The in-itself is still empty and remains empty as long as understanding is left to itself. By itself understanding is incapable of understanding any more. But the task is to grasp the speculative essence of understanding; this means that we must take its place and that we have already done so. The empty interior (the in-itself) becomes fulfilled by the return into itself of appearance as appearance, by way of the speculative sublation of appearance. Going beyond the initial characterization (which says that in appearance itself there is a non-sensible [Nicht des Sinnlichen]), the supersensible is determined positively.

This fulfillment of the initially empty supersensible is accomplished in two stages for understanding, which we again leave to undergo its experience with itself. Thus, Hegel distinguishes a first and a second supersensible,6 or the first truth of understanding over against the second truth,7 or the one side of the supersensible over against another side.8

According to all that we now already understand, we can expect that the distinction between a first and second supersensible is not a crude juxtaposition, but rather a speculative subordination in the sense of a dialectical belonging-together. The second supersensible is, namely, the reversal of the first one, but this does not mean an opposite which is merely placed alongside the first one. Rather, it means that inversion [Verkehren] which in its turning takes the other into itself and thus determines itself in a higher way.*

We shall now ask about the first supersensible, about what initially results when we let the appearance as appearance return into itself. We shall ask what the play of forces makes manifest in absolvence, when understanding accepts this play, not immediately, but as understanding. But the principle of understanding as determined by Kant—and this determination is crucial for Hegel—is unity. In its own way understanding takes the appearance—the arising and again vanishing manifold—when it simplifies and reduces to unity the manifold of appearance, the play of forces. This simplification of the manifold as the basic function of understanding in terms of appearance takes place when understanding, according to the Critique of Judgment, “thinks toward laws.” The play of forces finds its uniformity in law. But the reduction of appearance to laws as the ground of the play and its mode is explanation. The primordial function of understanding, the mode of its knowing, in which the known object manifests itself as law, is explanation.

The following speculative construction of appearance as appearance (of the play of forces) is supposed to complete this absolvent knowledge of the essence of understanding, and thus of the essence of consciousness as such. It follows accordingly that law and explanation play a central role. Hence, we also see now already the possibility of illuminating an interconnection, which we will expect as long as we have not prematurely lost sight of the guiding problem.

Already in the form of sense certainty, the universal as the true object of consciousness confronted us as the mediated simplicity which can be “this” as well as “that” in the sensible particular and yet which is neither “this” nor “that.” As long as universality is confronted, as was shown in perception, with the manifold of particulars (alsos) in their arbitrariness, the universal is conditioned by the particulars in their independence. But the true mediating universality is not conditioned in this way—that universality which is itself the ground of the individualization of particulars, so that the particulars exist only in the universal. It is only this universality which is the true, absolvent universality.

The next question concerns how understanding arrives at the law at all and how law is initially determined. This is the same question in another form as the following: What does the play of forces testify to when it is taken by understanding in accordance with its principle? And how is the appearance as appearance sublated into its truth through the thinking of understanding? Hegel says: “Understanding, which is our object, finds itself in just this position, that the interior [of things] has initially come into being for it only as the universal, still unfilled in-itself. The play of forces has {up to this point at least} only the negative significance of not being in itself and only the positive significance of being that which mediates, albeit outside the understanding. The connection of the understanding with the interior [of things] through mediation is, however, its own movement through which the interior [of things] will be filled out for the understanding.”9 By looking ahead to the decisive result of the whole of the Phenomenology, the following interpretation will especially emphasize the isolation of individual steps from one another. And this means that it will stress the divisions within the movement of dialectics, wherein we together with Hegel let understanding absolvently unfold itself to in-finity.

The play of forces testifies to the manner in which the particular forces move as cause and thus effect and so are made effective. When a force, which we initially represent as driven-back-to-itself and poised, is effective, it externalizes itself. But the externalization in itself simultaneously effects the other. Thus, the other which is effected is itself manifest. This second one thus becomes self-externalizing as the first force was; and vice versa, with the externalization of the second one the first force is simultaneously driven back into itself, becoming what the second one initially was. The play of forces is their arrival on the scene, in which the players exchange back and forth the determinations which they initially showed. This immediate exchanging in which one becomes reciprocally what the other was, indicates what the forces are, seen from the play. But what they are, namely, the difference constantly given back and forth against each other, is simultaneously the way in which they are. Content and form coincide; and in keeping with this coinciding in one, something unified stands out in which all special forces constantly vanish. This one, which constantly belongs to each force reciprocally, this universal simple into which the play of forces returns in accordance with its essence, is the law: the way or the how of being effective as the what of what is effective. Appearance or the play of forces does in itself retain the disappearance or the instability, but in such a way that, in this instability of exchanged differences, what is stable is present as law. Thus, the law is what is constantly the same in contrast to what is constantly not the same. What appears in the sensible, in the appearance, namely, the same over and beyond [über] what is not the same, is the supersensible [das Übersinnliche], The interior of things, that which determines their externalization, their reciprocal back and forth movement, is a “serene realm of laws.”10

Thus, the first supersensible is obtained. But this serene, enduring universal can be taken only as the first, not as the ultimate, truth of understanding. For over against this universal, the law so conceived, stands again absolute change, the play of forces; and as another it thus conditions what lasts. The law is then the unconditioned universal only when it itself, in itself and by itself, contains the absolute change. Or, to say the same thing from the other side, the side of the appearance: Appearance as changing retains something on its side which the law does not have; appearance retains for itself the principle of change. Thus, seen speculatively, the law has a lack and with this lack cannot yet be designated as unconditioned. And, on the other hand, appearance remains the counterimage of the supersensible, is not the appearance of the supersensible, thus is not yet the supersensible itself. Hegel plays here deliberately with the ambiguity of the genitive. Appearance of the supersensible—as an objective genitive—means that appearance is another, over against that which appears in it. But this appearance of the supersensible must now become the appearance of the supersensible in the sense of the subjective genitive: the supersensible appears. Appearance is itself only something which belongs to the supersensible and exists only with and in the supersensible.

As we determined law so far, why is it not capable of taking into itself the appearance as such? Because the law, conditioned by appearances, is at the moment related only to a certain multiplicity of appearances. This means that the law itself is in each case only one particular law among others. The application of the law until now shows an indefinite number of extant laws. But a multiplicity of laws is, in the light of understanding’s own thinking in terms of law, against the principle of understanding and is thus a deficiency, because the principle of understanding is unity. Hence, understanding must allow this plurality of laws to come together into one. But this one in turn exists only by putting aside the determinateness of the many unities. The one is not the many; an example of this—to name a law which plays an important role both in Kant and in Schelling’s philosophy of nature, and which Hegel naturally has in mind here—is the law of universal attraction, which defines the fall of bodies with respect to the earth as well as the motion of the earth itself in connection with heavenly bodies.

The concept of law as the universal unifying principle is attained with this universal law. And yet this “concept of the law … goes beyond the law as such”11 and turns against it. The law of gravity, as what heaviness is in itself, has its necessity only through gravity itself, through force. But now force is no longer taken in the sensible immediacy as one extant among others, but as that which in law as law unfolds itself initially into the differentiated, which law as such regulates. Thus, precisely here, when it seems as though the true universal, the universal law, has now been found, we come across a duality: force (gravity) and the law which has the force in itself. Here again force is what is indifferent to the law. Thus, also in this manner we have not yet obtained the simple unconditioned universality. And obviously this universality cannot be obtained along the way that we have just followed, if we consider that understanding arrives at the universal law only by setting others aside. However, this is typical of the one-sidedness of abstraction, in which a most universal sameness, the most universal law, did emerge just now, but only in such a way that the non-identical many on the other side came to a halt. The one unifies the many, but in such a way that the many, as the other which conditions the one, are given in advance, as it were, to the one. The necessity of unification is understandable in terms of the principle of understanding, but not the necessity of what is to be unified as such. Thus, there remains an indifference which Hegel tries to make visible from still another angle, namely, with reference to the essence of movement, by starting from the thought of law as the law of motion.

If we again see things in their immediacy, movement in general is co-determined by space and time, a thought which Hegel developed speculatively in his manuscripts from the Jena period, in his philosophy of nature—a lecture course which to a large extent is very obviously nothing but a speculative paraphrase of Aristotelian physics. Aristotle already expresses this peculiar co-determination of motion by space and time when he says that, in order to grasp the λόγος of ϰίνησις, it is necessary to employ the λόγος of the place, of the empty, and of time (πϱοσχϱήσασϑαι… τῳ λόγῷ… τόπου ϰαὶ ϰενοῦ ϰαὶ χϱόνου).12 In the speculative consideration of the essence of movement, in the philosophy of nature of the Jena period, motion is dealt with in the closest proximity to the system of ether and then to the system of the sun. (Hegel’s concept of ether encompasses the basic meaning which Hölderlin has in mind when he speaks of ether, rather than that of present-day physics, which is, so to speak, denaturized.) This discussion culminates in showing how the essence of movement in and by itself requires space and time, such that movement implies that space goes over into time, and vice versa. The thrust of the whole context is that in this intimate relationship [Zugehörigkeit] of space and time to the essence of movement, the essence of the infinite is announced. Merely to illustrate what is stated at this point in the Phenomenology, I would like to quote a few sentences from the philosophy of nature of the Jena period, which show, at least approximately, the direction of these observations: “Time and space are the opposite of the infinite and of what is identical with itself in nature as the idea of the infinite, or they are the infinite itself in the determinateness of absolute self-identity. The reality of space and time or their reflection into itself is, as separated, itself the expression of the totality of moments. But what is thus separated in them remains immediately in the determinateness of the simple. What is different is posited in such a way that it would be indifferent and thus not have any essential determinateness at all, whereby it would deny its relation to its opposite and be for itself. On the contrary, this relation remains their essence. They do not face each other as substances; but their determinateness is as such immediately the universal, and not as something opposed to the universal—thus not as a self-sublating but immediately posited as something sublated, as ideal.”13

The brief mention of movement with the determinations of space and time, in the discussion of the object of understanding in the Phenomenology, corresponds to this fundamental thought. In the law of motion it is posited that movement divides itself in time and space and is determined by speed (velocity) and distance. This division pertains to movement in itself. But the parts themselves (space and time), seen in their immediacy, are independent and indifferent as far as movement is concerned, when in opposition as well as when together. The necessity of the division lies in movement, but—seen again in their immediacy—the necessity of the divided parts is not already posited for each other so that they originate together from out of the one. Movement is not difference in itself. It is not a unity which divides in such a way as to let the parts spring forth only in order to keep them back within itself at the same time.

As long as the object of understanding is not posited as difference in itself, the actually true (the unconditioned universal) is not attained. The object of understanding was initially posited as force, which of course dissolved itself into the play of forces. Now, by arriving at that to which the play of forces testifies, we come across law. By trying to grasp this as law in the universal, we again encounter force, now as the basis of law. Force as well as law shows itself as object of understanding; and the question is: How does understanding now understand that it is grasping force as the basis of law? What manner of knowing does the activity of understanding manifest? In anticipation we said that this manner of knowing is “explanation.” What does this mean? We formulate a law, e.g., the law of electricity from lightning; and this law is differentiated from force, from electricity itself. But force itself is thereby constituted exactly as the law itself. The difference which we make regarding the content is fundamentally revoked again. The movement of explanation is pure tautology14 and as such is absolute change. It is in itself the opposite of itself. A difference is posited, force reduced to law, law reduced to force—and yet one still says at the same time that there is no difference.

Up to this point we found the absolute change only in appearance, and not in the interior of the object of understanding, in the law. Now, in any case, a further step is revealed: absolute change is also in understanding itself. But force as the ground of the law is the concept of the law. But this concept is a concept of understanding. Thus, the change which is in understanding arrives at its own matter, at the interior or, according to what we have said so far, arrives at the law. So far the law was that which stands with constancy and stability over against appearance in its restless play. But now this identical [law] becomes unequal, the unequal of itself—becomes force. But appearance as unidentical becomes as law unequal to itself, i.e., identical with itself.

When compared with the result of the first truth of understanding, everything is now inverted. The unequal, appearance, is equal; the identical law is non-identical (change). However, this inversion should not be understood such that what is inverted (the law as unequal to itself and the appearance as equal to itself) would still exist as a differentiation which has been solidified. The inversion is not a turning away. Rather, the inversion as inversion encroaches upon the first supersensible and receives it into itself. The inverted world is this world itself and its opposite, in a unity.

But this unity, which differentiates itself and in the difference is itself the un-differentiated, is the difference in itself, the inner difference—infinity. “The simple character of law,” the truth of the object of understanding, “is infinity.”15 This infinity is the unconditioned universal. But for ordinary representation the universal is already the concept. The named infinity is the absolute concept; it is that universal which is no longer relative to the extant particular which is subsumed by it; it is that universal which is the differentiated in its difference and is simultaneously unity. Hegel says of the absolute concept that it is “the simple essence of life, the soul of the world,”16 but we can say that it is the essence of being.

Infinity coincides with what Hegel calls absolute restlessness; and now it can be admitted that this infinity “has already been the soul of all that has gone before.”17 But this infinity could not freely emerge, not only because in the first modes of consciousness the object was the other to knowing, but also because this other was initially taken and meant as that which it immediately presents itself to be—and can and must present itself to be—as long as we are to avoid thinking the contradiction. But if the difference in itself, the opposition in itself, is to be thought, then the contradiction must be thought, too.18

c) The infinity of the I. Spirit as λόγος, I, God, and ὄν

In order to assess the interpretation of the essence of understanding, it should be observed that by itself understanding is incapable of grasping infinity as such. Understanding happens upon infinity and comes against it, but it does not discover infinity as such. The concept of infinity is only for us; it is accessible absolvently. Understanding testifies only that consciousness is struggling with infinity, as it were, without conceiving it as such and that it can grasp infinity only in a new form of consciousness, such that consciousness specifically gets to know what in itself [in sich) is the inner difference in itself [an sich]. This happens in such a way that consciousness becomes aware of the I which differentiates itself from itself and thus knows that it is not differentiated from itself. Consciousness knows consciously of the inner difference, since consciousness is consciousness of the I and of the self—is self-consciousness. Or, to express it in the style of Fichte—but Fichte understood on the basis of the Hegelian inquiry—we can say that by saying I, I is posited as I:I = I. But I “equals” I is just the difference which has to be made, solely in order basically not to be a difference. Since this inner difference has the character of an I [ichlich] and since the I posits itself, it differentiates itself at the same time from the not-I. More precisely: As I, the I posits what has the character of the not-I [Nicht-Ichheit]; by understanding itself as I, the I understands what has the character of the not-I in general; and along with this the I understands the possibility of objectivity in general. With this there opens up for the I as I a realm for encountering this or that being which has the character of a not-I.

This relationship, which I have presented in the style of Fichte, shows nothing other than—to use an expression of Husserl’s—the “ego-logical” justification that and how consciousness of the thing, thinghood, and objectivity is possible only as self-consciousness. So much so that this self-consciousness does not present merely an additional condition for consciousness, but is in the unity of mediation the truth of consciousness, the truth of the three shapes of consciousness which have now been sketched.

In the same connection in which understanding shows itself absolvently, infinity is the actual object for understanding. When understanding understands force as such and comes to understand absolvently—at the very place where force manifests itself in its equality and inequality with law as the truth of appearance—at that very place understanding as the truth of perception is driven beyond itself. Insofar as understanding as the truth of consciousness still seeks its true in the object, but at the same time, taken absolvently, is driven beyond this truth, this can mean only that consciousness as such must become another; it can no longer remain only consciousness. The interior of things into which understanding penetrates is the interior of the genuine interior, the interiority of the self. Only because the interior of things is basically the same as the interior of the self, is understanding constantly satisfied with its explanation. In the belief that it is doing something else in its explanation, understanding “in deed” hovers around only with itself and enjoys itself.19

The objectivity of the object of consciousness is dissolved in the unconditioned universality, in the inner difference, which exists only as “I.” When the objectivity of the object, and along with it the object itself, thus lose their seeming independence, there is nothing more left for consciousness in which it could abstractly lose itself as in something other and alien. The relative is now not only almost given up, left behind, and abandoned to itself—so that consciousness could withdraw into itself—but in the entire previous history of the phenomenology of spirit, that is to say, in the dialectic of consciousness, the possibility of relativity is eliminated. The illusion of the relative is dissolved in the truth of the first simple absolute, in the truth of the infinite.

At the same time, something decisive becomes visible: Being determines itself logically, but such that the logical proves to be egological. We see this egological determination of being gradually unfolding since its beginning in Descartes, until via Kant and Fichte it receives its comprehensive and explicitly absolvent justification in Hegel’s Phenomenology. Thus, right at this juncture the decisive approaches and lines of inquiry into the problem of being in Western philosophy are gradually gathered in one. The inquiry into the ὄν was onto-logical ever since its beginning with the ancients, but at the same time it was already with Plato and Aristotle onto-theo-logical, even if it was correspondingly not conceptually developed. Since Descartes the line of inquiry becomes above all ego-logical, whereby the ego is not only crucial for the logos but is also co-determinant for the development of the concept of θεός as it was prepared anew in Christian theology. The question of being as a whole is onto-theo-ego-logical. It is important in this regard that the term “logical” is repeated everywhere. The apt expression of these relations in their original formation and their concise justification lies in the fact that for Hegel the absolute (i.e., the true being, the truth) is spirit. Spirit is knowledge, λόγος; spirit is I, ego; spirit is God, ϑεός; and spirit is actuality, beings purely and simply, the ὄν.

Only when we see the Hegelian problematic in terms of the whole of Western philosophy—and not only externally but also in the sense of the inner coincidence of the mutually determining perspectives of the question of being—only then do we have the basis for really understanding Hegel. We must work out this inner motivation of the Hegelian position as the completion of Western philosophy; and above all we must be receptive to this motivation in the decisive stages of the history of phenomenology itself.

Though hidden from itself, consciousness is self-consciousness. The absolvent presentation of knowledge thus does not arrive at something alien and other. On the contrary, this presentation in an initial, decisive movement has taken knowledge back from an alienation with the object—namely, knowingly taken it back, insofar as we obtain the essence of absolute knowledge only through knowing.

1. Vorlesungen über Ästhetik, X 1, 129 [trans. T. Knox, Aesthetics (London: Oxford University Press, 1975), I, 101].

2. Vorlesungen über die Beweise vom Dasein Gottes, XII, 413 [trans. E. B. Spiers and J. B. Sanderson, Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion (New York: Humanities Press, 1974), p. 211].

3. Hegels theologische Jugendschriften, ed. Nohl, p. 318 [trans. T. M. Knox, Early Theological Writings (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971), p. 274].

4. Cf. Enzyklopädie, Section 258 [trans. A. Miller, Philosophy of Nature (London: Oxford University Press, 1970), p. 35].

5. Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie, ed. Lasson, p. 50 [GW VII, 52; Logic and Metaphysics, 55].

6. Ibid., pp. 49f. [GW VII, 51; Logic and Metaphysics, 54].

7. II, 114 [GW IX, 92; Hoff., 115; E.T., 91].

8. See below, pp. 116ff.

*[Heidegger refers here to Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik, first published in 1929.]

9. II, 129 [GW IX, 102; Hoff., 128: E.T., 103].

10. Cf. above, pp. 24f.

11. II, 111 [GW IX, 90; Hoff., 113; E.T., 89].

12. II, 110 [GW IX, 89; Hoff., lllf.; E.T., 88].

13. II, 129 [GW IX, 102; Hoff., 128; E.T., 103].

14. Cf. Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik, pp. 29ff. [trans. J. Churchill (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1962), pp. 36ff.].

15. II, 130 [GW IX, 102; Hoff., 129; E.T., 103].

16. See above, pp. 47ff.

17. II, 101 [GW IX, 82f.; Hoff., 103; E.T., 80].

1. II, 102 [GW IX, 84; Hoff., 105; E.T., 81].

2. II, 107 [GW IX, 87; Hoff., 109; E.T., 85].

3. II, 108 [GW IX, 88; Hoff., 110; E.T., 86].

4. Cf. II, 109 [GW IX, 89; Hoff., 111; E.T., 87].

5. II. 107 [GW IX, 87; Hoff., 109, E.T., 86].

6. Cf. II, 121 [GW IX, 96; Hoff., 121; E.T., 96].

7. Cf. II, 114 [GW IX, 91; Hoff., 115; E.T., 91].

8. Cf. II, 124 [GW IX, 98; Hoff., 123; E.T., 98].

*[The German word verkehren, used here several tlmes, has two meanlngs (1) to turn, to invert, to reverse (thus reversal) to pervert, and (2) to mix to communicate, to associate.]

9. II, 112 [GW IX, 90; Hoff., 113; E.T., 89].

10. 11, 114 [GW IX, 91; Hoff., 115; E.T., 90].

11. II, 115 [GW IX, 92; Hoff., 116; E.T., 92].

12. Aristotle, Physics, Γ 1, 200b 19ff.

13. Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie, ed. Lasson, 202/3. [GW VII, 193–94].

14. On the tautology of explanation, cf. Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie, ed. Lasson, 47ff, 58ff. [GW VII, 49ff. and 59ff; Logic and Metaphysics, 52ff. and 62ff.].

15. II, 125 [GW IX, 99; Hoff., 124; E.T., 99].

16. II, 126 [GW IX, 99; Hoff., 125; E.T., 100].

17. II, 127 [GW IX, 100; Hoff., 126; E.T., 101].

18. Cf. II, 124 [GW IX, 98; Hoff., 124; E.T., 99].

19. Cf. II, 128 [GW IX, 101; Hoff., 127; E.T., 101].
