# II. THE REALM OF INQUIRY OF NEGATIVITY

1. On the conceptual language

“Negativity” for Hegel: the threefold difference of immediate, mediated, unconditioned consciousness (I represent—something) that is in itself unquestioned.

“Negativity” for us the name of a realm of inquiry: but according to the ordinary opinion already structured in anticipation of the other inquiry, the connection of saying-no, negation, negatedness, not, nothing, and nullity. (How “valuative” thought, which itself is essentially bottomless, meddles even with the question of the nothing.)

The nothing as the a-byss, beyng itself. But here beyng not in a metaphysical sense, not in orientation toward and from beings, but from out of its truth.

However, is not the determination a-byss taken entirely from beings? No, it has this semblance only initially.

2. Negativity

1. Hegel’s negativity is not a question for him; the “origin,” and that means at the same time: the essential structure of that which this term comprises, does not become questionworthy and questionable because negativity is already posited with the “domain” of its inquiry that is presupposed by it—posited with thinking: “I represent something in general”—in its “concept,” in its “thoughtness,” as the thought. The only thing that matters is to think thoughtness unconditionally, and thus thinking itself.1 Thinking therefore does not leave behind anything that would not have been mastered in its sense, which would be undecided; unconditioned thinking is the questionlessness itself.

2. Aside from the questionlessness of Hegel’s negativity, the negative is that which generally and consistently cannot at all require an interrogation; because the negative, the negated, and the negating belong to negation. Saying-no and saying-yes are originary forms of apophantic thinking. The negatedness can be “abstracted” from that which is negated as such and can be named the “not”; and if we apply this “not,” i.e., the representing negation, to everything that can be negated—i.e., to that which is at first affirmed, the totality of beings—then we get the nothing as the not of the totality of beings; and this is just nothing—to linger here at all is already the crudest misinterpretation. Because the nothing is what is simply “null and naught.” It would be the annihilation, the self-annihilation of thinking if one wanted to think farther and think through that which is null and naught. The self-evidence of thinking and the fact that thinking must always have “something” to think in order to be itself entail the complete questionlessness of negativity, where “negativity” names the self-evident connection of no, negation, negatedness, not, nothing, and nullity.

3. But thinking is self-evident, because it guarantees the essential characteristic of man, and because man—that is us—the thinking animal (animal rationale).2 The forms and manners of the thinking of this animal, which can always be encountered somewhere, can be described and recorded more closely, and in this process one can develop different views whose elaboration can reach varying degrees of depth. But even in its highest metaphysical system it will always remain the retrospective discussion of that which in its essential structure is clear and familiar. Based on this view it is therefore correct that negativity is considered to be questionless.

4. What are we driven by and to what end are we trying to tarry with what is questionless here? Is it so that we can still magically extract a question from it? Because it is precisely what is questionless that can still be ambiguous and therefore can be questionworthy.

What is questionless is on the one hand that which is not worth questioning, of which it has been definitely decided that it is unable to offer any support for an interrogation. On the other hand, that which is questionless is that which is at bottom undecided but which in the flight from mindfulness passes itself off as something that is decided. The flight from mindfulness in turn can run parallel with ignorance about the decisions, but it can also already be the consequence of a willful evasion of decisions; indeed the two can come together in it. In this case, that which is questionless has the almost unassailable form of that which is by all means self-evident.

5. Negativity is questionless both in the system that constitutes the consummation of Western metaphysics and in the history of metaphysics in general. The questionlessness of negativity goes back to the questionlessness of thinking as the basic faculty of man, the positing of whose essence is itself beyond questioning. What does this questionlessness mean and what does it comprise as a whole?

Thinking “says” of a being what it is and how it is. Thinking maintains the determinative relation to the being of beings. Thinking thus also and in advance indicates the horizon within which being determines itself as such. Thinking is thus not only the mode of enactment of the representing determination of beings, but it is at the same time and before all the pregiven horizon for the essential definition of being. Being is the presence and permanence that is unconcealed for apprehension and in the apprehension. To the extent that apprehension (νοῦς) determines itself as thinking (λόγος—ratio, reason), being is thinkability. This determination of being underlies in advance both the “idealistic” and the “realistic” interpretation of the relation to beings.3 The self-evidence of thinking therefore basically means the questionlessness of the fact that thinking is the determinative and horizon-giving relation to being.

Since thinking is the basic faculty of man, and the essence of the latter is considered to be self-evident from what was just said, the self-evidence of negativity and consequently the self-evidence of thinking means nothing less than the self-evidence of the relationship “between” man and beyng. From this a peculiarity arises that in various forms runs through the entire history of metaphysics: namely that man’s relation to the beings that he himself is not is doubted, interrogated, interpreted, and grounded in a manifold manner, while at the same time and before all man’s relation to being is beyond questioning, and this so “decidedly” that it is not even expressly considered but is asserted as the most self-evident of all that is self-evident. That which one is used to calling “ontology” is only the scholastic sealing of this self-evidence.

6. But the questionability of thinking in its essence and in its role as the pregiven horizon of the interpretation of being comprises something else that is equally questionless. Since thinking, which at first immediately ponders the being that is disclosed and encountered, is at the same time the guiding thread of the determination of being, that what we call the difference between beings and being does not expressly come into view as a difference; and because of this every question about the essence and the ground of this difference remains altogether within the domain of what is completely indifferent and unknown.

7. What then does the metaphysical questionlessness of negativity as the questionlessness of the essence and of the role of thinking signify? That the following has remained undecided: 1. man’s relation to being; 2. the difference between being and beings. These two distinctions belong together in the unity of the sole question: If the truth of being does not stem from beings, from what does being ever receive its truth and in what is this truth grounded? What is beyng if it is not a being and not the being that is most in being, but if it “is” neither a mere supplement to beings?

To inquire about negativity as the “energy” of unconditioned metaphysical thinking means to offer this undecidedness up to decision. To first set up this decision so that it can be seen and experienced, i.e., to make it a need, that is the sole thought of the thinking that asks the question of being. It lies in the essence of setting up this decision that, unlike any decision before, it must become a historical (not a historiological) confrontation while, at the same time, it must have carried out the leap into what is ungrounded, perhaps even into what is abyssal. Therefore, this thinking—even less so than any essential metaphysics—can never be spoon-fed in a bite-sized and doctrinal manner, as can be done with the insights of a science. What is possible, and within certain limits also necessary, is the constant and lengthy preparation for the leap into the inquiry of that which is undecided here. Such a preparation carries with it the danger of babbling about the leap instead of leaping.

3. Review

Last time we clarified once again the questionlessness of Hegelian negativity in terms of its rootedness in the common view of thinking. Most recently we have tried to view the essence of thinking in its unity and thereby to loosen up what is questionless into something questionworthy. How much we find ourselves placed in a domain of something questionworthy was shown by the fact that the question about the unitary essential ground of that which we determined to be the distinguishing mark of thinking remained without an answer and without an indication of the direction from where an answer is to be won, i.e., the direction into which we must inquire more originarily.

Perhaps we already stood at a site from which only a leap would carry us “further” and into the open, and all dissection or synopsis that seemingly takes us further only ever remains a supplement.

But for now and perhaps for a long time we act more genuinely in our thinking if we do not leap and instead keep the meditation in the foreground. The latter is not the foreground of a mere background (something that could be reached on the same plane) but a foreground of an a-byss. This barely speakable word “abyss” thinks something very sober and unique and must not be abused as an empty term that would present a merely sentimental emotion and an illusion of depth of merely rambling vague half-ideas, conceived on the spur of the moment, as serious thinking.

1. Consciousness as self-consciousness and the infinity that opens up for oneself. Cf. Kant, Welches sind die wirklichen Fortschritte, die die Metaphysik seit Leibnizens und Wolffs Zeiten in Deutschland gemacht hat? (1791). Akademieausgabe XX, 270. [English: “What real progress has metaphysics made in Germany since the time of Leibniz and Wolff?,” trans. Peter Heath, in Theoretical Philosophy after 1781 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 362.]

2. Cf. Kant on the difference from all “beasts.” Kant, Preisschrift on the progress of metaphysics. (See above fn.1.) Ibid. (“… a total separation from the beasts”).

3. Cf. Kant’s “technology” of “nature” {Kant, Critique of Judgment. §23.}