1
# INTRODUCTION: THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC
Reason has insight only into what it itself produces according to its own design. (Critique of Pure Reason Bxiii)

Critical philosophy did indeed already turn metaphysics into logic but, like the subsequent idealism, it gave to the logical determinations an essentially subjective significance out of fear of the object. (SL 21.35)

Logic and Idealism
Hegel repeatedly said that the core of his philosophy, what everything else depends on,1 is to be found in a two-volume, three-part book that he wrote while teaching classical Gymnasium students in Nürnberg between 1812 and 1816, at times teaching versions of the book itself to the no doubt bewildered high-schoolers.2 It was called The Science of Logic. The first volume is called an “objective logic,” and it contains a “logic of being” and a “logic of essence.” The third part, the second volume, is called the “Subjective Logic” and it consists of a “logic of the concept.” To understate the matter in the extreme: this book still awaits its full contemporary reception. Aside from occasional dust-ups about its beginning argument or its “movement,” several invaluable studies of particular topics like negation, reflection, ontology, and the nature of concepts, and occasional attempts at an overview or summary formulations of its purpose, it has not inspired the kind of engagement found in work on Kant’s Critiques or Hegel’s own Phenomenology of Spirit or Philosophy of Right. This is so even though there are a number of other examples of philosophical reflection on logic that form something like a context within which Hegel’s project ought to be comprehensible as an alternative. I mean not just Kant’s transcendental logic, but Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre, Frege’s Begriffsschrift, Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, and Husserl’s Logical Investigations.3

Hegel also says frequently that a science of logic is a “science of pure thinking.” This must be understood in the context of what we designate as “German Idealism.” This idealism, at least the thread that travels from Kant through Fichte to Hegel (Schelling’s “idealism” is another issue), has three components. The first is the claim that a priori knowledge of the world, the ordinary spatio-temporal world, is possible—knowledge about that world, but achieved independently of empirical experience.4 That the Logic is a work of a priori philosophy is hardly controversial, even though Hegel understands the relation between pure thinking and thinking informed by what is other than thinking in a way that is uniquely his, as will be discussed in chapter 9. Idealism in this sense is primarily a critique of empiricism (not of empirical knowledge, although it is sometimes confused with such a critique; empiricism is itself an a priori position, intended to explicate what any possible knowing amounts to). The second component is where all the interpretive controversies begin. It is the claim that this a priori knowledge, while, in some sense to be specified, about the world, consists in thinking’s or reason’s knowledge of itself, thinking’s determination of thinking, or, as Hegel designates, a “science of pure thinking.” (Kant’s allegiance to this principle is manifest in the beginning quotation above.) This is the heart of Hegel’s claim that his speculative logic is a “metaphysics” in a new sense. It is understandable, but also quite false, to think that these two components can be jointly claimed only if objects of knowledge depend for their existence on being thought, or if access to objects requires some sort of mind-imposed unification of sensory elements, resulting in a “subject-mediated” product, not the thing as it is in itself. There are certainly versions of this existential dependence or subject-mediated interpretation of German Idealism, especially Kant, in the extant literature. This view no doubt stems from the understandable but hasty inference that if such a conceptual structure is not derived from experience, it must be contributed by, or “imposed by,” us. This must be so, if objects depend for their experientiability on such “mind-imposed” unity. A variation on this notion of restricted knowledge is the claim that philosophy can determine only the finitely knowable aspects of the in principle knowable, requiring us to admit that we do not know objects as they fully are in themselves. And an even more extreme idealism would hold that the mind (or the divine mind active in us) creates its own objects by thinking them, which certainly explains how pure thinking could on its own determine the nature of the real. But it does so at the price of great implausibility.

But there is clearly a question to be answered, and such an answer would be the third component of idealism: how could the first two components possibly be true, if the standard versions of the third component are not true too. One interpretation of Hegel on this point is that these two claims can be jointly assertable only if what there “really” is, the “really real world,” what is accessible only to pure reason alone, is itself thought, “thinking moments”—something like the Absolute’s or God’s thinking itself, an inherent, evolving noetic structure. This is sometimes what scholars are insisting on when they insist, against what they perceive as “nonmetaphysical” readings, that Hegel was certainly (and for many quite obviously) a “metaphysician” in just this sense. The nature of the real is an intellectual entity.5 The thesis of this book is that these do not exhaust the relevant alternatives, that Hegel most certainly was a “metaphysician,” but that he did not live in this Neoplatonic neighborhood or in the mind-imposed-unity or mind-making-reality camps. That is, the following will attempt an answer to the third dimension of idealism, how the first two elements could jointly be true. The most important watchword for Hegel’s Logic, once we realize that no form of “object dependence on subject” is at stake in that project (an extremely widespread view of what idealism must be to count as idealism),6 is that we are talking not about any dependence but about an “identity” (a “speculative identity” to be sure) between the forms of pure thinking and the forms of being. It will take a while to exfoliate the terms of such an identity claim.

I note immediately that there is a widespread view that this Hegelian project (in any possible interpretation of it) is doomed from the start, that there is not and cannot be such a topic as “pure thinking.” Since the Jena romantics and Hegel’s contemporary, Schelling, began this line of attack, it keeps reappearing in the European tradition down to the present, with the popularity of “new realisms” and speculative materialisms and the influence of cognitive and neuroscience. The criticism is that thinking must always be understood as grounded on, or dependent on, or an epiphenomenon of, materiality or contingency or the unconscious source or instinct of the thinker. But from Hegel’s point of view, this criticism is question-begging from the start. In his treatment, the topic of pure thinking has nothing to do with the thinker, the subject, consciousness, the mind. The topic rather raises as a problem the possibility of the intelligibility of (also) whatever is being touted as source or hidden origin, the conditions assumed in any such determinate identification.7 Any such criticism, in so far as it is a thinking, a judging, a claim to know, is always already a manifestation of a dependence on pure thinking and its conditions, and such “moments” of pure thinking are to delimit the normative domain of intelligibility (what can rightly be distinguished from what, or posited as “ground,” for example) and not any process or series of events that goes on in supposed independence of the empirical world. Pure thinking is neither dependent on nor independent of the empirical or materiality or the brain or whatever new absolute comes into fashion. That question already manifests a misunderstanding of the question of pure thinking itself.8 This is not to deny that any reference to thinking presumes a thinker, indeed a living, purposive rational thinker. That issue, which is important to Hegel, will be the subject of chapter 7. It is, rather, to argue for the autonomy of the question of “any thinking at all.” That is, it is to insist on the priority and autonomy of “logic,” and that means for him its complete self-determination of its own “moments.” (As just noted, one could put this another way: it is to insist that there is such an enterprise as philosophy. That is, all philosophy, from Plato’s Republic to Descartes’s Meditations to Wittgenstein’s Tractatus to Quine’s Word and Object, is an enterprise of pure thinking, “confirmed” not by empirical evidence but through the self-examination by pure thinking of itself.) Hegel’s enterprise in the SL takes as its topic the categories or “thought-determinations” (Denkbestimmungen) necessary for thought to have determinate objective content, an enterprise that at the same time specifies the determinations inherent in the possible determinacy of being itself.9

As will be obvious in the next two chapters, I think we start heading in the right direction if we consider the Logic’s project under the rubric John McDowell introduced in the second lecture in Mind and World,10 the “unboundedness of the conceptual.” The formulation is inspired by Wittgenstein’s remark that “When we say, and mean, that such-and-such is the case, we—and our meaning—do not stop anywhere short of the fact; but we mean: this-is—so.”11 McDowell’s different formulation of the same point is that “there is no ontological gap between the sort of thing one can mean, or generally the sort of thing one can think, and the sort of thing that can be the case.”12 Or, even more to the point of the present study, “The constraint comes from outside thinking, but not from outside what is thinkable.”13

The context of McDowell’s discussion is perception and perceptual knowledge claims, so it is of limited use for the details of The Science of Logic, which is some sort of claim to a priori knowledge. Moreover, the relation of thinking and the thinkable in the Logic faces a problem not germane to McDowell’s concerns in his book. The problem is: how to account for the determinate moments of “any thinking of the knowable,” such that they count as the determinate moments of the knowable itself?14 In the expansive sense of the German Wissenschaft, Hegel’s formulation (“a science of pure thinking”) means first of all that it is an account of, a theory of, pure thinking (what pure thinking is), and he means a pure thinking that is a knowing, one that is onto objects as they are. In the logic of the day, that means he is talking primarily, but not exclusively, about judgments. (Not exclusively because he thinks the nature of judgments cannot be isolated from an account of concepts and inferences.) Pure thinking is thinking without dependence on the deliverances of sensibility, without reliance on experience. Traditionally the question inspired by the very formulation of such a project arises naturally: What, if anything, objective can be known just “by thinking,” without reliance on empirical experience? In the long tradition of pre-Kantian Western rationalism, that question was often understood to be asking: Are there entities, or aspects of reality, knowable only by pure thinking, thinking unaided by sensibility? Inspired by the pure thinking of mathematics as well as other considerations, the rationalist answer was that there were such entities, not available to empirical experience, but knowable by the light of reason, by pure thinking. There have been many candidates for such a status: souls, minds, God, universals, monads, substance, the Good.

Kant gave another sort of answer. There is something accessible only to pure thinking, but it is not some object or entity. The proper object of pure thinking is thinking itself: either the possibility of any thinking at all, which Kant called general logic; or, in a topic that Kant invented, the possibility of thought’s having objects at all, or knowledge, which he called transcendental logic. Thinking’s reflection on any thinking claiming to be knowledge, or a critique by reason of itself, could determine the form of any possible object of knowledge, and could specify as well what objects could never be objects of either empirical or pure knowledge. Thinking about thinking could determine what there is, and is not, to be known. The core of such a claim, for both Kant and Hegel, had especially to do with the implications of a relationship that they both insisted on between thought’s determination of what it is to be thinking (in the sense of knowing) and the conceptual content required for thinking to be thinking (in the sense of knowing)—that such content must be understood as what it was only by being known a priori to be such content. Distinctly philosophical knowledge, for that is what we are discussing, is and must determine for itself its own objectivity. More prosaically put, if there is to be such knowledge, it can’t be made true by something “outside” of judgment, to which it can be compared. Any such appeal to objectivity is “inside” judgment’s self-determination, a point made the most of among the idealists by Fichte. (To say that the Ich posits itself and in so doing posits the nicht-Ich is his way of making this point. It has nothing to do with creating an external world by thinking it.)15 Thought was in this sense “self-determining”; concepts could be said to “produce their own content.” This involves revolutionary claims made first by Kant about the exclusively productive or spontaneous nature of thinking, and the inherently self-conscious nature of all thinking. Both claims were enthusiastically embraced by Hegel, and it will be the task of the next two chapters to explain the nature of these claims, and their implications as Hegel saw them, implications for philosophical truth quite different from those Kant drew.

This was not traditional rationalism because Kant denied any receptive relation between a domain of objects and pure thinking. Hegel agreed. Pure thinking had only itself as its proper object. It is an endlessly interesting aspect of this claim (and almost impossible to hold in mind properly) that thinking so conceived is not conceived as an entity or event, whether psychological or immaterial. Thinking is its own “object” only in the sense of what pure thinking is about—the activity of thinking necessary for it to be thinking, and necessary for it to be a thinking of (in the sense of knowing) objects. But, when the claim is formulated this way, Kant also seemed to say that philosophy could determine something about the objects of thought only insofar as they were subjected to “subjective” or “our” conditions, to conditions for the applicability of thought, a condition which itself required something other than thought, forms of sensible intuition unique to finite rational knowers. This was required for Kant because, in his most radical difference with the rationalist tradition, he conceived thinking as exclusively an activity, a “spontaneity,” and in no sense receptive.

There is no question that Hegel rejected what he understood to be such “subjective idealism,” and so rejected the Kantian claim that we know only phenomena, not things in themselves. In fact, Hegel never seems to tire of rejecting it at every chance he gets, noting that Kant seems to give with one hand (knowledge) what he takes away with the other (“merely” of appearances), and that he draws the inference from his demonstration that the exercise of our form of thought produces contradictory results, generates antinomies. Kant should have been led to question the adequacy of his understanding of our forms of thought.

And Hegel does not reject the notion by arguing that we do know the “things in themselves” that Kant said we couldn’t. The clearest statement of his position is in §44 of the EL, where he rejects the concept altogether. He basically notes that if we define the notion by abstracting from any means we have for knowing, there is nothing to be known. We should not be surprised that we end up with something unknowable, a caput mortuum.

Equally simple, however, is the reflection that this caput mortuum is itself merely the product of thought, more specifically, [the product] of thought that has progressed to pure abstraction, [the product] of the empty I that makes this empty identity of itself into an object for itself. (§44)

And yet Hegel also never tires of saying that his own theoretical philosophy is like Kant’s in that at its heart is a logic, an enterprise in which our thinking has itself as its proper object. He is also clear that such a theory of pure thinking is a successor to, not a further episode in, the history of modern rationalist “metaphysics.” He also never tires of mentioning his debt to Kant, even given the strong disagreements. This sets the stage for the interpretive task in what follows. The following remark is typical, so typical that fidelity with it ought to function as something like a “necessary condition for the possibility of work on the Kant-Hegel relation.”

The primary concern [das nächste] of the Kantian philosophy is thus that thinking is supposed to investigate itself, the extent to which it is capable of knowing. Nowadays, the Kantian philosophy has been left behind, and everybody wants to be at a point further on [weiter]. To be further along [Weitersein], however, has a double meaning: both to be further ahead and to be further behind. Looked at in clear light, many of our philosophical endeavours are nothing but the method of the old metaphysics, an uncritical thinking along [unkritisches Dahindenken] in a way everyone is capable of. (EL §41A)

This task is also connected to the two senses in which the appeal to the “ideal” in German Idealism can be understood. As already noted, if it is possible to identify some common core to the tradition classified as “German Idealist,” it would at the very least be as a sustained critique of empiricism, the claim that the basic intelligibility of the world cannot be explained by the sheer deliverances of sensibility alone, together with the subsequent putative organization of such deliverances by abstraction, association, generalization, and so forth. This is connected as well with a rejection of empiricist accounts of action, as if the basic engine of action is conative, with reason only of strategic use, only a means to satisfy desires.

As noted earlier, the best way to understand what makes German Idealism idealism is this anti-empiricism, now, post-Wilfrid Sellars, understood as the rejection of the possibility of and so any foundational reliance on givenness.16 “The given” is understood as noninferentially warranted cognitive states, such that any such putative state counts as knowledge of a kind, or a basis of knowledge, just by being experienced. By contrast—and here the heart of the idealist claim—any sensory interchange with the world (or even any intellectual receptivity) that is to be able to play any role in cognition can play such a role only if it always manifests a categorical structure. So of course the central questions have to be: What is the nature and status of this categorical structure (or pure thinking’s knowledge of its own structure and possibility, at the same time an account of any object’s knowability)? And what does “always manifests” mean? Moreover, while it might seem natural to think that if this categorical structure cannot be said to be derived from, contributed by, sense experience, it must be contributed “by us,” must be subjective, as if “imposed” by us on such sensible deliverances, this implication is clearly rejected by Hegel. Hegel thinks that this is Kant’s position, and, again, there is no question that he rejects that sort of subjective idealism (whether he is right that this is Kant’s position or not).17 What possibility is left?

It is perfectly clear to Hegel how much he is asking of us, how natural one (empiricism) or the other (subjective idealism) alternative seems, but he nonetheless insists we must leave this assumed alternative behind.

We must then reject the opposition between an independent immediacy in the contents or facts of consciousness and an equally independent mediation, supposed incompatible with the former. The incompatibility is a mere assumption, an arbitrary assertion. All other assumptions and postulates must in like manner be left behind at the entrance to philosophy, whether they are derived from the intellect or the imagination. (EL §78)

This might suggest—and has to many—another alternative, already mentioned. The “ideal” in German Idealism could also refer to something else. In some roughly Platonic sense, ideal could refer to an ideal or noetic (nonsensible) structure of reality, more real than, underlying, manifest imperfectly in, sensible deliverances in experience and itself accessible only to pure reason. Hegel’s own characterizations of idealism sometimes do not invoke the Kantian formulations noted above, but assert that idealism is constituted by the “unreality” or “untruth” of the finite. By contrast, what is “truly real” is the infinite, the Concept, the Absolute. We will need to understand those passages in their proper context, but in merely introducing his basic claims, it is already clear how difficult it will be to pin down Hegel’s core position, because, as we shall see, Hegel rejects an “objectivist” interpretation of such a categorical structure. This is of course not surprising. Hegel is supposed to be a dialectical thinker, and we would expect each one-sided alternative to be “sublatable” into a higher unity. His dissatisfaction with such one-sided alternatives is something frequently voiced by Hegel. For example, in the addition to EL §24, Hegel says (at least in this context, channeling his inner Schelling),

the logical is to be sought in a system of thought-determinations in which the antithesis between subjective and objective (in its usual meaning) disappears. This meaning of thinking and of its determinations is more precisely expressed by the ancients when they say that nous governs the world, or by our own saying that there is reason in the world, by which we mean that reason is the soul of the world, inhabits it, and is immanent in it as its own innermost nature, its universal.18

This passage already suggests that the subjective idealism/objective idealism alternatives are not the only alternatives, that this very formulation of the alternatives has missed something crucial to Hegel. As we shall explore in detail in the next chapter, what any cognitive thinking does is to render something intelligible, a task that has many different dimensions. The truth of any such claim is often, of course, a matter of empirical experience, but the question of what any such account is, what it is to render successfully intelligible in any of these and many more senses, and what relation such renderings have to each other, is not, cannot be, an empirical matter. And “what it is to render successfully intelligible” need not at all be limited to “what we count as having done so.” Understanding what it is to render something intelligible is just thereby to understand the intelligibles, what there is to be thought—being. We shall see how far one can go in Hegel by developing such a thought.

Further, in Hegel’s treatment, as in Kant’s, rendering intelligible in any of these senses is not just to grasp a content; or, it is not an intuitional reception. Thinking is discursive; to think what is the case is to assert that it is (the basic unit of intelligibility in Hegel’s account is the judgment; assertion its linguistic manifestation), and that is something always open to challenge and interrogation. This means that a science of thinking is also a science of “reasons,” of ways of giving reasons in rendering anything genuinely or properly intelligible. It is in this sense, thinking’s determining for itself what it is to think, in the sense of judging what is the case for appropriate reasons, that there can be a “science of logic.”19

So there is at least to be a common claim in these alternatives, something like: there is some sort of rationally articulable, categorical structure without which the world would not be even empirically intelligible at all. We could even, at this stage, call this categorical structure (in a way very different from the contemporary understanding of formal logic) the world’s “logic” and this in the oldest sense of the logos inherent in all things. We want to know the status of this categorical structure: subjective, objective, or neither subjective nor objective, or somehow both subjective and objective. (Logic is not “formal” in Kant’s sense, that is, empty; but rather it is said to be formal because it is a science of form. However, as we shall see, this does not mean that it is a science of special objects, thing-like entities. Such forms are said to be instead moments, Denkbestimmungen, thought-determinations, even “pulsations,” and that will require some unpacking.)20

So to put Hegel’s idealism in summary form: Logic is the science of pure thinking. Pure thinking’s object is, and only is, itself. But this “object” is not a nature, an object. The Logic has nothing to do with “the mind” as a substance or thing. Hegel is following both Aristotle here—“That part of the soul, then, which we call mind (by mind I mean that part by which the soul thinks and forms judgment) has no actual existence until it thinks”21—and Kant, for whom the claim that the “I think” must be able to accompany all my representations is a logical point, expresses the form of thought, and is not a claim about how the mind actually operates. If Hegel were making a claim about the mind’s nature, knowledge would be limited by its “instrument,” something Hegel had been vigorously denying since the introduction to the Phenomenology. In knowing itself, what pure thought knows is the possible intelligibility, the knowability, of anything that is. But the intelligibility of anything is just what it is to be that thing, the answer to the “what is it” (ti esti) question definitive of metaphysics since Aristotle.22 So in knowing itself, thought knows, of all things, what it is to be anything. Again, as for Aristotle, the task of metaphysics is not to say of any particular thing what it is. It is to determine what must be true of anything at all, such that what it is in particular can be determined by the special sciences (what in Scholasticism were called the transcendentalia). Or: it is to know what is necessarily presupposed in any such specification. (Of course the Physics and the De Anima are also philosophical sciences for Aristotle, but Hegel will have a Philosophy of Nature and a Philosophy of Spirit too.)23

As we shall see over the course of the first three chapters, a Hegelian logic is also not an Aristotelian or Scholastic logic, not a descendant of the Port Royal logic, not a version of a Leibnizean/Wolffian conception of logic, is closer to but must still be distinguished from both what Kant calls “general logic” and that Kantian invention: “transcendental logic.” And it clearly cannot be interpreted in the terms fashioned by Frege for a predicate logic, or any version of a mathematical or symbolic logic. But we don’t get very far by understanding what the Logic is not. It is a truth of Hegelian logic itself that determinacy, in this case correctly identifying what a Science of Logic is, cannot be a function solely of a concept’s negative relation to what it is not. The concept must also have a determinacy, as he says, for-itself, however related he takes these two moments to be.

The structure of his book itself suggests—and this is of course not surprising in Hegel—the general shape of some kind of ever more adequate self-consciousness about the determination of a kind of conceptual content, that kind specifiable by thinking alone. In the Logic, that kind is the content appropriate to the conceptual capacities required for the thought of anything at all. (Given the judgmental character of intelligibility for Hegel, by “the thought of anything at all” I mean the thought of—in the sense of the knowledge of—anything’s being the case, anything’s being such and such, anything happening.) There can certainly be other determinants of content, empirical experience, for example. But The Science of Logic is not about concepts like “horse” or “Ferris wheel,” but about concepts, or conceptual capacities, necessary to render intelligible any objective content. This will not mean that such content “depends” for its intelligibility wholly on subjective capacities as if the content amounts to rule of thought understood as such a subjective capacity. It is Hegel’s position that the structure of reality is conceptual, is its intelligibility. The question is what Hegel means by this. Such an inquiry will culminate in something like “the concept of the Concept itself,” and so concerns a kind of logical (not psychological) full self-consciousness.24 (According to Hegel, the Concept is the “ground and the source of all finite determinateness and manifoldness” [SL 12.23].) Again, pure thinking has only itself as its object.25 That is, the dynamic of his book is internally self-critical. Implicit but ungrounded assumptions about such conceptual determination are exposed and shown to be inconsistent with some initial conceptual articulation, thus requiring revisions and reformulations. It is certainly the case that the final “logic of the Concept” makes conceptuality itself its theme, and, whatever else is going on in the SL, it is certainly the case that assumptions about conceptuality (especially about conceptual content or determinacy) were at work in the book’s prior accounts, but not attended to as such.26 In EL §17, Hegel says that the “unique purpose, deed and goal” of his Science is “to arrive at the Concept of the concept and so to arrive at its return [into itself] and contentment [Befriedigung]” (EL §41).27 And in the addition to §83 he says simply, “Only the Concept is what is true, and, more precisely, it is the truth of Being and of Essence. So each of these, if they are clung to in their isolation, or by themselves, must be considered at the same time as untrue.” This impression—of a self-critical, self-correcting internal process of reflection—is only strengthened toward the end of the EL, when Hegel writes about (or says, and one of his students takes it down), in summation of the point he has reached,

the concept that has carried itself out [sich selbst ausgeführt] in its objectivity, or the object that is inner purposiveness, essential subjectivity [wesentliche Subjektivität]. (§214A)28

As noted, the book was published in three installments in 1812, 1813, and 1816, and partially revised (book 1) in 1831.29 In 1817 Hegel published a shorter version of the Logic, as the first part of his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (with new editions and several changes in 1827 and 1830),30 and it has become common to refer to the former as “the greater Logic,” and the latter as the Encyclopedia Logic. The former is an infamously and profoundly difficult book, written in a terminology that was unprecedented and never repeated; and the EL is only slightly more accessible. There is not even much consensus about answers to the two immediately obvious questions that it raises: What is the book about (what does Hegel mean by logic; in what sense is his science a science?), and what sort of demonstration or argument for his results does Hegel think he is providing? The suggestions sketched above about answers to these two questions will be pursued in a variety of ways in what follows.

An Emancipatory Logic?
Among the more unusual self-characterizations of Hegel’s project is that it has something to do with the realization of freedom. A typical example from the EL:

Since in thinking things over their true nature emerges and since this thinking is just as much my activity, that true nature is equally the product of my spirit insofar as the latter is a thinking subject. It is mine in accordance with my simple universality, i.e. as an I that is entirely with itself—it is the product of my freedom. (§23)

This sort of claim has several dimensions in Hegel. It refers to the Logic as the pure self-determination of thought by thought (which is thereby autonomous, wholly self-determining), and ranges over an account of the logic of freedom and of its actuality. That is, freedom in the sense of self-determination is, although a pure concept, actual.31 The culmination of the course of the demonstration in the greater Logic is the logic of the Concept, about which Hegel says that having reached this realm, we have reached the realm of subjectivity and “freedom” (SL 21.409). As we shall see in chapter 4, he makes a great deal out of the Logic’s distinctive doctrine of negation in explaining what he means by this, sometimes called “negativity.” He even says that the capacity for negation that he treats in the SL amounts to the “objective moment of the life of spirit by virtue of which a subject is a person, is free” (12.246). Later, in the account of the logic of the Concept itself, he says that “In the concept, therefore, the kingdom of freedom is disclosed” (12.15). In the addition to §31 of the EL, Hegel waxes poetic over such “logical” freedom, using a dramatic image to characterize the achievement of such a logic. Invoking his technical term for freedom, Beisichsein, being with oneself, he says,

This being with self [Beisichsein] belongs to free thinking, a free voyaging, where, with nothing under us and nothing over us, in solitude, alone by ourselves, we are purely at home with ourselves. (EL §31)32

This should be seen in marked contrast to Kant, who might appreciate in a general way the practical implications of a critique of reason (e.g., limiting knowledge to make room for faith), but who remained, with one exception, pretty much a “philosopher’s philosopher,” intensely focused on the strength of the arguments about the possibility of synthetic a priori knowledge—his own argument and his opponents’. The one massive exception was Kant’s concern about the power and influence of moral skepticism, and he seemed aware in that context that a philosophical critique of practical reason was necessary for more than strictly theoretical reasons. But after Jacobi had caused such a public stir with his claim that modern or post-Kantian philosophy’s arrogation to itself of supreme critical authority had to terminate in nihilism, something like the public significance of philosophy was on everyone’s mind, and this clearly played some role in Hegel’s construction of a very large frame of significance within which to work.

To some extent this sense of significance has to do with that very project of the “self-grounding” of reason inherited from Descartes, intensified by Kant and Fichte, and challenged so publicly by Jacobi. If the modern age was to be characterized by allegiance to the supreme authority of reason, and in that sense to individual and collective autonomy, then it fell to philosophers to account for the source of the authority of reason, especially in terms of the traditional alternatives (revelation, faith, poetic inspiration, received tradition), and especially if that authority was to be “absolute.” But there could be no justification for such authority except on the basis of some rational ground, so reason had to be understood as in some way self-authorizing, or in Kant’s influential phrase, “self-legislating.” This is very much the understanding of Kant that Hegel presented to his students in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy.

The standpoint of the philosophy of Kant . . . is in the first place to be found in the fact that thought has, through its reasoning, got so far as to grasp itself not as contingent, but rather as in itself the absolute ultimate . . . Thought grasped itself as all in all, as absolute in judgment; for it nothing external is authoritative, since all authority can receive authority only through thought.33

A “Science of Logic” is the most important element in Hegel’s fulfilling such an ambition. As we have seen, such a science is a “science of pure thinking.” What any thinking does is to render something intelligible, a task that, as we shall see, has many different dimensions and is inseparable from the giving of reasons. But, as we have also noted, to say what something is, or to explain why something happened, or to understand the point or purpose of anything, is not just to present a picture or grasp a content. It is to judge, something always open to challenge and interrogation. Hegel decisively sides with Kant’s view that thinking is discursive, and this means that a science of thinking is a science of “reasons,” of ways of giving reasons in rendering anything genuinely or properly intelligible.34 Eventually, as suggested above, we would need a fully reflective account of the “ground of giving grounds” in some particular sense. In the practical domain, in Kant and the post-Kantians, I am free when I am acting on reasons about what ought to be done. This is a form of self-consciousness that, according to Kant, is paradigmatically embodied when I act wholly on reasons, and not just prudently or instrumentally, as when I act for the sake of ends I have not rationally determined I ought to have. To know on the basis of reasons that are likewise “absolute” or, in Kant’s terms, “unconditioned” is a parallel form of freedom, even though the claim to such a self-consciousness seems extremely ambitious.

While Hegel is a fully subscribed member of such a modern philosophical project (the project of “absolute reflection,” or complete critical self-grounding), he insisted that we had lost our way in carrying it out, and that a wholly new beginning had to be made (even though the new beginning was also the culmination and completion of prior attempts). Our science of reasons, ways of giving grounds and rendering rightly intelligible, had too narrowly fixed on a limited number of ways of understanding such “pure thinking,” and, more radically than philosophers like Kant, he thought that the stakes in getting this right were much higher than had been appreciated and could not be limited to philosophical problems alone. A form of life had begun to grow up around such a self-understanding of the authority of reason-giving understood in this way (a form of life still very much with us), and the practical implications of such a restricted sense of justification were becoming ever more visible and ever more disturbing.

That is, although it is often forgotten in the usual rush to condemn Hegel’s triumphalism, reconciliationism, Prussian accommodationism, and so forth, all of his major works express varying degrees of anxiety about the major norms and institutions, that basic form of life, emerging in Western Europe in the first third of the nineteenth century; “modernity” for want of a more precise word. Thanks to Hegel’s influence, the content of this anxiety has now become familiar, perhaps so familiar it now sounds like background noise, the constant rumble of the interminable “dissatisfactions of European high culture.”35 The simplest post-Hegelian versions of what concerned Hegel are easy enough to call to mind. For example: the prevailing modern norms of epistemic authority, those governing the kind of accounts given by modern natural science, inevitably have the effect of “reifying” human subjects (confusing subjects with objects), and such human subjects themselves inevitably actually become, treat themselves and each other as, such reified objects. For Hegel, however, we could understand how to avoid such self-objectification only if we could understand how there could be such distinct subjects of thought and action that are also spatio-temporal objects in the natural world. (The relation between Geist and Natur in his Encyclopedia terms.) It is sometimes casually said that Hegel accepts that human thought inevitably produces contradictory results like this and that once we understand such an inevitability, we are in a position to accept it. But it is precisely the unacceptability of this result as a set of inconsistent judgments that inspires a theory of thinking adequate to the overcoming of such an unacceptable opposition. The problem, in other words, is in this sense (and not in any sense that is a relative to “logic” in “symbolic logic”) a “logical” problem.

Many other aspects of modernity are also traced back by Hegel to an inadequate understanding of what it is to render something intelligible, to render an action or an institution defensible. This may look like an abstract, idealist approach to the social problems of modernity (as if we would be better if we could just think better), but in just the same sense as Hegel will want to treat concept and intuition in experience as distinct but inseparable, he will want to say that so-called “material” issues (like the organization of the means of production, or the relations of power between capital and labor) are inseparable from forms of self-understanding, as inseparable as such forms are from their material embodiment. Moreover, while we may notionally assent to the major moral, ethical, religious, and political norms dominant in modern societies, they are nevertheless still, in Hegel’s account, experienced as “external,” not genuinely self-imposed or our own, not tied to what we have reason to do or believe, but alien, merely “positive,” in Hegel’s early term. In the same sense of “alienation,” the daily texture of our work experience can come to seem exclusively a concession to the realm of necessity and in no sense any sort of free self-expression. Because of the way modern individuals have come to understand their own individuality, they have created a fragmented, anomic social order that is nothing but a collection of atomistic parts in minimal external relations with one another, and so profoundly unsatisfying, incapable of generating significant forms of allegiance and identification. Most broadly put, in the terms Hegel uses in his lectures on fine art, we have to live now like some strange amphibian creatures, moving between two worlds, at home in neither, requiring of ourselves allegiances to dualities we do not know how to reconcile: individuality and familial and social whole, mechanism and teleology, necessity and freedom, nature and Geist. (Of course what he is also suggesting is that amphibians do succeed in being completely at home in both worlds, yet fully in both, a kind of living or lived-out compatibilism. This is possible for us if we achieve the right self-understanding and if that self-understanding is embodied in our institutions and practices.)

This situation means above all that absent such self-understanding and embodiment, we do seem to ourselves at home in neither; we have not achieved or realized freedom, already in Kant a kind of “absolute” value. (Human beings have infinite and inestimable worth, but only as such free beings.) Or, in Michael Theunissen’s terms, we have managed to understand and to realize only a kind of ersatz freedom: successful domination (Herrschaft), a way of embodying a relation between independence and dependence, self and other, that typifies, according to Theunissen’s Hegel, “metaphysical thinking” itself.36 What we need is a way of understanding ourselves and our relations to others and the world that would make possible the overcoming of all such fundamental “strangeness” or “alienness,” a relation to our own sensible lives more reconciled and integrated than the “ruling” relationship Hegel attributed to Kant’s philosophy.37 All these ruling or mastering relations could be properly understood in their rightly “negative” relation to nature, to others, and to our own selves, but when properly understood, as a negation that could itself be “negated” if understood properly by Hegel’s speculative science, restoring some sort of harmony.38

Expressions of this sort of dissatisfaction are just as prominent in the SL as in so many other works by Hegel, especially those from his early and Jena period. In the 1812 preface to the SL, Hegel again begins by addressing what Jaspers would later call “the spiritual condition of the age,” and again he identifies a way of thinking as the most important characteristic of our age, a way he calls “the understanding,” Verstand (especially as Locke and Kant understood it). The dominance of this mode of account-giving has left us spiritually impoverished, like, he says, a richly adorned temple without a “holy of holies”—no metaphysics, no theology, and, most important of all, nothing to replace them. We have just common sense and the fixity and rigidity of Verstand. In the introduction to the work, he again notes that “the reflection of the understanding has seized hold of philosophy” (21.29), leaving us to treat issues that cannot be solved empirically, the most important and pressing human issues, as matters of mere private opinion.39

In the preface to the second edition of the EL, Hegel’s language even assumes a religious or spiritual tonality. He says his own understanding of the ultimate condition of intelligibility, the “idea,” is “concrete spiritual unity” (die konkrete, geistige Einheit), and contrasts it with the restrictions of Verstand, which provides us with merely “abstract, spiritless identity” (abstrakten geistlosen Identität). In an extraordinary passage from the Phenomenology, Hegel claimed that the task of philosophical education in antiquity was to break the hold of sensuous particularity and elevate us to the universal, whereas now we have the opposite task, to find a way to give “life and actuality” to the universals that dominate all of thinking. That task

consists in actualizing and spiritually animating the universal by means of the sublation of fixed and determinate thoughts. (PhG §32)

This sounds exactly like the task of the SL, although it has been hard for commentators to find “the spiritual animation.” Indeed, this all seems to promise something quite extraordinary and, no doubt to contemporary ears, something quite implausible, a treatment of “logic” in some way in the service of an emancipatory ideal—an emancipatory logic, of all things.40

Hegel’s unease with all this, together with Rousseau’s incalculable influence, and similar concerns in figures like Schiller and the early romantics, is what begat those familiar later claims about the “ideological” nature of bourgeois philosophy, the one-dimensionality of modern societies, the totalization of instrumental reasoning, the dominance of “identity thinking,” the crisis of the European sciences, the colonization of the life-world, and so forth.41 And while all such critiques can be traced back to Hegel, he does not make the case for such limitations by contrast with a positive or utopian theory, as is the case in many of these examples. His claim to philosophical glory is exactly as Theunissen has described it: that the proper exposition (Darstellung) of some mode of understanding is just thereby an internal manifestation of these limitations (Kritik).42 This is not a straightforward proposal. It depends on an adequate account of the most general covering term for the moments of failure or breakdown in the Logic’s development: what Hegel calls Schein or semblance. Some determination of what it is to be “finitude” or “limit,” some concept essential to possible intelligibility, is shown to be the mere Schein of finitude or limit. The notion is just as difficult and fraught with potential question-begging as Marx’s claim that capitalism can be understood as in itself self-critical, self-undermining, ultimately self-contradictory, something that can be shown by nothing more than a proper presentation of its own inner “logic.”

The idea that the basic problem with modern self-understanding is some sort of “totalization” or “absolutization” of a form of account-giving that should be understood instead in its proper partiality is what could be called the “critical theory” reaction to and appropriation of Hegel. Far more prevalent in the past fifty years or so has been the sweeping charge, often explicitly addressed to Hegel as the Ur-Rationalist or Ur-Philosopher, that the very search for even some sort of polysemous and contextualized nontotalized “universal” is the core of the problem (that is, the problem is philosophy itself, or self-grounding reason itself, with Hegel and his Logic as the supreme representative of such an ambition), and what we must do is find some way of affirming, acknowledging, letting be—and here the list is endless—difference, otherness, the existential individual, Dasein, the subaltern, the absolute indeterminacy of sense, and so forth. (“Il n’y a pas de hors‐texte” is another way of introducing the infinite indeterminacy of text, the ubiquity of text so understood.) This has led to various forms of radical incommensurability claims, and so to radical relativisms and, inevitably, radical decisionism as the only possible antifoundationalist origin of any norm. (In Alain Badiou, for example, and, even more ominously, in Carl Schmitt.) This latter reaction, as well as the former, assumes what has never been established: that we have understood what Hegel means by the “concrete universal.”

However, this anxiety, and Hegel’s obvious dissatisfactions with what he clearly considers the most typical philosophical representatives of this form of life, are also counterbalanced by a vast ambition and self-confidence for which Hegel is even more famous, even if not influential. This combination creates quite a complicated point of orientation that must be addressed before one can get a handle on his most important book. Stated in the simplest possible terms, Hegel’s diagnosis of the fix we have gotten ourselves into consists in the claim that we have not properly understood how to understand ourselves and the social and natural world in which we dwell. This is not, though, because we have simply been regularly mistaken, the victim of false philosophies, the wrong ideas. It is due to the inevitable partiality and one-sidedness of various ruling concepts (let us say, for shorthand, norms for explanation and justification, the normative structure of “the space of reasons”). This can be apparent only retrospectively and within some systematic account of their interrelation. Even more crudely put: we have “thought ourselves” into this dissatisfying existence, and the way we have thought ourselves into it, if properly understood, can also itself show us a way out, a way Hegel wants to characterize as the completing or culmination of “the understanding,” Verstand, in a synthetic, dynamic, and comprehensive reason, or Vernunft, and not as the rejection of modern rationality—again, as if that notion were simply a mistake or an ideological tool of the oppressor to dupe the masses.43 If we understand this properly, we will be able to comprehend why the institutions of modern society, however limited and alienating, are also now the incipient realization of human reason: why the culmination of Christianity is incipiently the doctrinally thin version of Protestantism that Hegel approved of, why the achievements of modern or romantic art actually amount to the incipient completion of the human need for art as a major vehicle of self-knowledge, why we are entering a postphilosophical age, not because philosophy has been exposed as illusory and impossible, but because the love of wisdom has become wisdom.

In fact, there is, from Hegel’s point of view, reason to believe that the complexity of this situation has created something quite unprecedented that only his philosophy, with its ability to explain the “positive” role of the negative, can account for. Life in modern societies seems to have created the need for uniquely dissociated doxastic states, wherein we sincerely believe ourselves committed to fundamental principles and maxims we are actually in no real sense committed to, a situation evinced by what we in fact do. (This is the sense in which Kierkegaard thought most modern people were—that is, were not—“Christians”).44 The principles can be consciously and sincerely acknowledged, but given the principles they are (Verstand), cannot be integrated into a livable, coherent form of life. Or we are committed to various policies that, nevertheless, we would, again in all sincerity, disavow, even though our actions betray us.45 In his early works, Hegel claimed that the need for modern philosophy itself arises as an attempt at a reconciliation of what modern philosophy left in “disunity” (Entzweiung, DS 9), and a striking sort of disunity is this dissociated relation to ourselves. (Often the task of the SL is said to be transcending the limitations of “representational thought” [EL §13Z] or the “philosophy of reflection,” all avatars of Verstand.)

Hegel of course does not believe the modern social and historical world is the way it is because people have been paying too much attention to limited and one-sided philosophers. (This is what Marx seemed to think when he claimed that Hegel had everything upside down, had us walking about on our heads, that Hegel thought that the social world was the way it is because of the thoughts, the oughts, people believed.) He often calls attention to the fact that philosophical concepts, what he calls “thought-determinations” (Denkbestimmungen), “instinctively and unconsciously pervade our spirit everywhere” (SL 21.17–18). Moreover, the problem is not the contents of our beliefs but the way we have come to collectively regulate what is believable, and these norms are not manifest, attended to much, in explicit attitudes. Our norms for authoritative explanations and for how we justify ourselves to each other are imbricated in the everyday fabric of a form of life, and philosophy is as much an expression of an age as it is that age comprehended in thought. (How it can be both is itself a philosophical theme: the relation of concept to “actuality.”) But Hegel in The Science of Logic concentrates not on an experiential (or “phenomenological”) limitation in a form of self-understanding but on the limitation of the form itself, considered, he says, in abstraction from its experiential manifestation. He goes so far as to remind us that the logic is “the realm of shadows, the world of simple essentialities, freed of all sensuous concretion” (21.43). This would seem to have as an unavoidable implication at the very least a caution about the limitations of Hegelian logic, a warning that however central the Logic is to everything else Hegel wants to say, it is still a restricted and limited picture of thought’s self-determination. A “realm of shadows” does not seem to be a compliment; it even seems, paradoxically, to be a vaguely self-critical remark since it echoes the kind of thing Hegel says about Verstand and metaphysics. It is also a striking, even astonishing image, a realm of shadows, especially since the shadows are “moving,” animated, a dance of shades.46 In the rationalist tradition, of which Hegel is some sort of card-carrying member, the sensible world we muck around in is supposed to be the realm of shadows. It would still be possible to say that the ultimately intelligible, the self-determining concept of the Concept, the absolutely thinkable, thinkability itself (what we conclude the Logic with), is a reflective illumination that allows us to see the world-in-its-shadows, to see its structure of intelligibility in a way it never exists, isolated as such. (So understood they never cease to be shadows, given Hegel’s radical hylomorphism—to be defended in the following—but they are fully determinate shadows, sharply defined, not fuzzy anymore.) The Realphilosophie would return us to the embodied form of these making-intelligibility-possible forms, Natur and Geist.47

Nevertheless, Hegel does place serious explanatory weight on these “thought-determinations” and their proper contextualization that, however “instinctively and unconsciously” they function, is hard to exaggerate. And, accordingly, for him this imbrication of such thought-determinations in how we actually hold each other to account also requires a historical as well as a systematic account, because such general norms change and, Hegel thinks, change in ways that can be rendered intelligible. (In section 14 of the EL, Hegel says explicitly it is the “same development of thinking” [diesselbe Entwicklung des Denkens] that occurs in the history of philosophy as occurs “purely,” in the logical development of thought itself, freed from its historical exteriority.)48 Thus, an account of the Logic must be an account both of the unique sorts of “logical” limitations and recoveries it sets out and at least implicitly about the bearing of such a demonstration, what the implications are for a form of life that embodies such a form of self-understanding.49 That there is such a bearing at all is already an indication that Hegel thinks that a way of understanding understanding has various action-or-praxis implications, can even be said to be action-guiding (or “world-constituting”) in a way, and not just with respect to the logic of notions like freedom or individual. Even “positing reflection” or “the syllogism” has such implications.

Thus, it would not be an exaggeration to say that Hegel’s basic claim, according to the way of reading him I will defend, is that we have not properly understood the “grammar” of spirit (the logic of the self-relation, both individual and collective, that makes up spirit), and this is connected with our failure to understand the grammar of possible renderings-intelligible or account-givings in general. (These are connected because of the necessarily self-reflexive nature of account-givings, the topic of chapter 3.) And it would also not be an exaggeration to say that, for Hegel, once we do understand it, we (at least we philosophers) will be freed from the illusion that some particular form of account-giving (like modern Verstand) could be taken to be “absolute”; the proper relativization (historically and systematically) of different accounts of account-giving will have been made.50 Or, stated in its most surprising form: Hegelian philosophy has no distinct doctrine of its own; its content is the right understanding of past attempts at account-giving in their limitations and interconnection.

Although this is clearly Hegel’s sense of the significance of the Logic, the notion of a “living” or organic or properly concrete or animated understanding of thought itself, what I have called the problem of the bearing of such a logic on a form of life, has remarkably little resonance in the literature on Hegel’s book. This is largely because, before one could address the issue, one would have to have figured out at the least the basic position concerning what is supposed to have such a bearing, and the great obscurity of the text made that very difficult. At any one point or another in the text, it is very hard to know with any confidence what are the alternatives to Hegel’s actual claim, and (in a logic Hegel was quite sympathetic to) if one can’t do that, one can’t determine what the claim is. The book has produced no standard commentaries, and even in periods of philosophical history where Hegel played an important role, the Logic was hardly the center of the discussion.

The Concept
At the very least, one can say that the subject matter of the SL clearly appears to be concepts, or rather items more like metaconcepts, a series of very general nominalized predicates and nominalized verbs that figure in, characterize the types of, any first-order conceptual discrimination and explanation. (We don’t, at such a first order, discriminate, or predicate by invoking “becoming,” “substance,” “finite,” “essence,” or “the idea of the good.”) Hegel regularly calls the concepts that he discusses “categories,” and that at least suggests that he thinks that the Logic’s categories, while themselves concepts,51 delimit kinds of concepts and conceptual capacities, and thereby the possible objects of such determinations. (How, and in what sense, extraconceptual objects enter the picture is, in effect, the basic problem in understanding the book.) These categories can be considered rules for the possible empirical or practical specification of any first-order conceptual discrimination, for what sorts of concepts of objects there must be. In the 1831 preface he tells us that the “condition of true knowledge” is “the treatment of concepts and of the moments of the concept in general” (21.16). Although this issue will have to be discussed in detail, I mean here the kind of distinction Hegel makes in the logic of the Concept.

There is no question of demonstrating for a word chosen from ordinary life that in ordinary life too the same concept is associated with that for which philosophy uses it, for ordinary life has no concepts, only representations of the imagination, and to recognize the concept in what is otherwise mere representation is philosophy itself. (21.130, my emphasis)

Although Hegel devotes surprisingly little space to any such discussion of what he is doing in the book (in effect, he just does it),52 the ambition of the treatise clearly is not meant to be limited to some isolated domain of discourse. Rather, as a “logic,” it appears to question the very possibility of rendering anything intelligible, offering a satisfying account,53 or “conceptualizing,” and at such a level of attempted comprehensiveness, we can say that the enterprise is, or at least appears to be, something like an account of all possible account-givings, a scope that would include the basic form of everything from ethical justifications (“That is unjust; you shouldn’t do it”), to empirical judgments (“That’s not a dog, it’s a fox”), to the Second Law of Thermodynamics.54

And again that looks like a theory of conceptuality, the heart of the determinate generality presumed in account-giving formulated in whatever way one likes: judging (asserting), explaining, understanding.55 At this point, this is a vague characterization. It would seem to cover everything from what Kant, Frege, and Wittgenstein would regard as formal logic (understood as the “laws of thought,” the laws that determine what could be an intelligible thought about anything at all)56 to laws governing the possibility (as Kant would put it) of determinate thought about objects, given that there are domains of kinds of objects that would require different “accounts.” The broad notion of “giving a logos” will have to be specified further. It will be especially important since Hegel identifies what are in effect three different “logics,” each governed by apparently very different notions of conceptual determinacy.

Here is a clear example of Hegel saying what I am claiming he is saying. It is a passage that touches both on his unusual account of the self-constituting character of human self-understanding (in the way assumed in the summary above) and on the general project of the SL.

The most important point for the nature of spirit is the relation, not only of what it implicitly is in itself to what it actually is, but of what it knows itself to be to what it actually is; because spirit is essentially consciousness, this self-knowledge is a fundamental determination of its actuality. As impulses the categories do their work only instinctively; they are brought to consciousness one by one and so are variable and mutually confusing, thus affording to spirit only fragmentary and uncertain actuality. To purify these categories and in them to elevate spirit to truth and freedom, this is therefore the loftier business of logic. (21.16–17)

Finally, it is by means of such a project that he wants to demonstrate something crucial in his account of “the understanding” that we started with. That is, we will have understood the limitations of that characteristic of Verstand he mostly describes metaphorically: its static or lifeless isolation of conceptual discriminatory powers that are actually in some sort of a “living relation” to each other, that even manifest what he calls, in another (baffling) metaphor, the “life pulse” of the Absolute. The Logic, then, will mostly (two-thirds of it, the “objective” logic) be about limitation, one-sidedness, failure (“negativity,” what in fact is the life-pulse of the Absolute). And in his typical turn of phrase, that negativity will provide a positive result, the integrative systematicity of Vernunft.57

In the terms that Hegel will introduce, his claim in the SL can be put this way. The culmination of Hegel’s theoretical position is a doctrine about what he calls “the Absolute.” This is a position that is supposed to serve the same function as the Platonic doctrine of Ideas, the Christian God, Descartes’s and Leibniz’s and Spinoza’s accounts of substance. We can say that for Hegel, the Absolute is the Concept, where he means conceptuality as such, not any particular concept but a concept among many. As we shall begin to see in the next chapter, and especially in the third, such conceptuality is apperceptive spontaneity, the principle, speaking loosely, by virtue of which anything is intelligible as what it is. Apperceptive spontaneity is not understood as a subjective mental activity, opposed to or addressed to or imposed on what there is. Properly understood, apperceptive spontaneity, the principle of intelligibility, just is the principle of the intelligibles. This means not that objects are self-conscious but that such an understanding of the Concept, once the self-determination of the “moments” of conceptuality itself, the products of apperceptive spontaneity, has been determined, is what objects conform to in being the objects they are. If we understand this properly, we understand apperceptive spontaneity “in its actuality,” as having “given itself” its own actuality, the actuality of the intelligibles, what there is. This is related to what Kant called establishing the objective validity of the categories, but Hegel insists that such an understanding of the relation between thought and being is established within the activity of pure thinking, not by appeal to anything extraconceptual, like the pure forms of intuition. (And the result is certainly not possible because thought creates its objects, its actuality, just by thinking them.) When thus conceived, the Concept is understood as, in Hegel’s terminology, the Idea.

Put in terms of the history of philosophy, what all of this will amount to is an attempt by Hegel at a highly unusual synthesis of the Kantian revolution in philosophy, especially the anti-empiricism, self-grounding character of reason (aka “the Concept”), and the most important Kantian innovation, the spontaneity of thinking, together with essential elements of Aristotle’s understanding of metaphysics, especially the Aristotelian notions of energeia, which Hegel translates as Wirklichkeit, actuality, the proper object of first philosophy, and, as we have already seen, the core of the classical view that “nous” rules the world, all in contrast to the rationalist metaphysics of nonsensible objects accessible to pure reason alone. Hegel is no metaphysician in this rationalist sense, but he is most certainly a metaphysician in the Aristotelian sense.58 That is, at any rate, the thesis of the following book. I will begin in the next chapter by looking at how Hegel characterizes the relation between his SL and metaphysics, and by trying to clarify and defend the relevance of Aristotle just claimed.59

An implication of this approach is perhaps the most distinctive of all of Hegel’s philosophical claims about the results of the SL. At the highest level, the level Hegel aspires to reach, we are dealing with the most general a priori claims in ontology. Traditional examples would be that what is real are, say, ideal objects, Ideas, universals, imperfectly apprehensible in sensuous reality; or “what there is” are mere bare particulars, or bundles of universals, or only mental ideas which exist only when thought; or that all there is, is one infinite substance, neither mental nor physical; or infinitely many simple nonspatial substances, windowless, in no real relation to any other, and each expressive of the whole of the universe from its point of view; or “what there really is” is what the most advanced physical science is committed to. At a finer-grained level, we mean there are substances and properties, or events that cause each other, or bodies and minds, subjects and objects.

According to the traditional understanding of metaphysics, these are competitors. The truth of one excludes the possibility of the truth of others. This is especially the case with the claim that the possibility of there being, say, genuine subjects is incompatible with the ontology required for there to be objects. So either there are only subjects and states of subjects (or One Subject) or there are only objects and their properties and states (like events and states of affairs).

The most ambitious element of Hegel’s view of his own results is simply that these are not competitors. Each can be properly understood only as a partial element in a logical totality. When we have understood their place in such a whole, we can understand why each can be said to be partially true but also false. This does not mean that there are Leibniz’s monads and Spinoza’s substance and Platonic ideas and Cartesian substances. The classical positions must be understood in their “logical” character, must be shown to express a necessary “determination,” a Denkbestimmung of pure thinking, and so a result of thinking’s own self-determination of intelligibility as such. When they are so understood, their partiality as such logical moments and their complementarity can be properly understood. In so understanding such a comprehensive account, we have understood “the Absolute,” the Concept in its Actuality, or the Idea.60 That is, that notion, the Absolute, does not introduce a new member of the metaphysical set of options introduced above as examples. It amounts to a retrospective understanding of the logic of, or the logical interrelation among, those “moments.” This is not to say that the “Absolute” perspective is philosophically informative. Its most important reconciliation of oppositions can be understood only from such a perspective, that between subject and object.61

The Plan
What follows is not a commentary on the Logic, a task that would probably take at least a lifetime. It is an interrogation of a single question, introduced in the next chapter: What does Hegel mean by claiming that “logic” has “taken the place of the old metaphysics,” and so that logic properly understood can be understood as a new metaphysics? In part 1, I discuss three thematic issues that I argue are indispensable in understanding that claim. In chapter 2, I discuss the identification claim itself (logic is “now” metaphysics), and so the general issue of Hegel’s understanding of the relation between the forms of thought and the forms of being. (In his discussion of the science of thinking and the forms of thinking, Hegel never means any old kind of thinking. He means, as Kant did, the forms of thought constitutive of, necessary for, forms of knowledge. For the German Idealists, “thinking,” at issue in a science, was judging, a claim to truth. The pure forms of thinking are the forms necessary for any judging to be so much as a putative form of knowledge, and so these forms of thinking are the forms of being, of objects. This does not mean that one can wave the magic wand of “to be is to be intelligible” over Kantian-like categories and insure their status as metaphysical. One must establish the proper status of pure thinking as such, the enormously complicated issue of the Logic’s “first moment” must be clarified, and one must defend the strong claim of internal necessity Hegel makes about the development of such concepts, none of which aspects involves any magic.) In chapter 3, I discuss the implications of Hegel’s understanding of the Concept itself, his most general term for the basic bearer of truth, judgment, as apperceptive spontaneity. This will prove crucial in beginning to understand the logical “movement” that is distinctive of the work’s progress through its various topics. In chapter 4, I discuss the manifold ways in which Hegel understands the speculative logic of negation, attempting to distinguish Hegel’s core position from various misinterpretations and to show its role in the topic introduced in the previous chapter, logical “movement.”

In part 2, I try to show how the general interpretation advanced in part 1 can make sense of the core issues (and admittedly, only those) in the three books of the Logic. Chapter 5 introduces the “logic of being” by an extended comparison with the problem of “givenness” in the PhG, arguing that that book is a “logical” version of Hegel’s attack on immediacy and givenness in all its forms. Chapter 6 presents an interpretation of Hegel’s logic, and so metaphysics, of essence—what for him the need for an essence-appearance distinction amounts to, the basic logical problem in making the distinction, and how Hegel addresses that issue. Chapter 7 addresses an assumption throughout the Logic: that thinking pure “thought-determinations” requires a “movement” of thought, as if there were a kind of conceptual life at work in the Logic. The proposal is to get clearer about this by examining an assumption Kant and Hegel share about the “purposive” nature of reason. Chapter 8 deals with one of the most counterintuitive implications of Hegel’s identification of his logic with metaphysics, his attempt to show that “life” is not an empirical but a logical or pure concept. An implication of this is then presented in chapter 9: the identity of the Idea of the True and the Idea of the Good.