2
# LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS
The system of logic is the realm of shadows, the world of simple essentialities, freed of all sensuous concretion. To study this science, to dwell and to labor in this realm of shadows, is the absolute culture and discipline of consciousness. (SL 21.42)

Forms of Thought and Forms of Being
Hegel frequently says something about a science of logic that is both extremely interesting and extremely controversial. A typical example is from paragraph 24 of the Encyclopedia. It is also a claim that lands one in the middle of a number of long-debated interpretive controversies.

Thus logic coincides with metaphysics, with the science of things grasped in thoughts, which used to be taken to express the essentialities of the things. (Die Logik fällt daher mit der Metaphysik zusammen, der Wissenschaft der Dinge in Gedanken gefaßt, welche dafür galten, die Wesenheiten der Dinge auszudrücken.) (Translation modified; all of these emphases are Hegel’s.)

What he means by implying that logic can only now coincide with metaphysics, after we have somehow passed beyond the traditional metaphysical view that “thoughts” are to be considered the “essentialities of things,” is quite a compacted claim, to which we shall return. It is clear enough already that Hegel follows Kant’s innovation in his response to the empiricist challenge, the first step in a long and complicated rejoinder to Hume and empiricism in general. The basic question is, How could there possibly be objectively valid concepts, true of all objects, but not derived from experience? Where could they come from? In Hegel’s terms, this amounts to the question, How do concepts that are the products of thought alone “give themselves” content, where by content we mean something extraconceptual? Indeed, we mean to say something about the extraconceptual as such, being, the world. Then the beginning of an answer is that there are concepts, expressions of different conceptual powers, needed for thinking to be thinking at all. What else could it mean for Hegel to characterize logic, a science of pure thinking, as first philosophy? Accordingly, it shall be the goal of these first three chapters to explain that this means for Hegel, at the same time, to determine the other side of the same coin, to determine objects in their thinkability, where that means their suitability not for a finite, subjective power, but for thought as such, that is, objects in their intelligibility, in their being at all intelligibly what they are. Their being what they are is their concept, or their “being their concept,” for Hegel. The concepts did not come from anywhere, any more than the thinking power comes from anywhere. Knowing this form is genuine philosophical knowledge, and would not be knowledge if the forms were not also the forms of objects. We are interested only in thinking beings (we and the empiricists alike), and thinking has its necessary conditions, the concepts, the conceptual powers, which constitute its possibility.

Now, this is a general picture of what was for Kant the great value in beginning reason’s self-critique and his pursuit of objective synthetic a priori knowledge with an appeal to “logic,” or “Pure General Logic,” as a “clue” that will help establish a transcendental logic, a general picture we need to keep in mind to understand Hegel’s appreciation of Kant’s strategy and his own different use of it. Kant’s own text in the “Metaphysical Deduction” is, however, much more complicated. T. Rosenkoetter,1 following a suggestion by B. Longuenesse,2 has argued that in establishing the Table of the Functions of Judgment, Kant is implicitly already making a distinction between a Pure General Logic, which is wholly formal (in no way considers content) and treats only the relation of thoughts to other thoughts, and a consideration that treats logic as the logic of judgment, where that means already considering that the function of judgment is relating our representations to objects. (Rosenkoetter shows that this form of reflection does not violate Kant’s norm for what properly constitutes transcendental logic, i.e., it does not introduce what constitutes the specific form of our access to content, spatio-temporal intuition.) It can be useful to think of Hegel’s science of pure thinking as also classifiable neither as what Kant calls pure general logic, nor as transcendental logic (tied as it is to the pure forms of receptivity), but as a logic of the knowable as such, or a “logic of cognition” in Rosenkoetter’s sense. I hope to make this clearer in what follows in this chapter.3

Moreover, it does not follow from the fact that logic coincides with metaphysics that all of metaphysics coincides with logic and only logic. Hegel’s so-called Realphilosophie, his Philosophy of Nature and his Philosophy of Spirit, are also, properly considered, metaphysical projects.4 But there is first the large issue of the logic-metaphysics relation itself. What I propose to do is to say something about the historical context of logic in and after Kant, and present a few of the terms of art with which Hegel wants to explain the substance of the claim that logic is now metaphysics (section 1); speculate on what he might mean by “metaphysics” (section 2); delimit enough of what he means by logic to understand the substantive identification (section 3); and assess some of the implications of this way of looking at things for an interpretation of The Science of Logic as a whole.

We need to say something first about the historical context in which Hegel’s §24 claim must be located. And that concerns the central issue introduced into theories of logic by Kant: the relation of concept to object. Then there is the question of Hegel’s relation to that innovation.

The innovation is Kant’s most famous and important, and concerns general logic understood as an a priori reflection on the relations of ideas. Kant’s view is, of course, a critique of the claims made on behalf of that reflective activity, and the critique concerns the modern tradition stemming from Descartes, embodied in Arnauld’s and Nicole’s Port Royal Logic in 1662, as well as the Leibnizian/Wolffian metaphysical tradition. The former held that clarity about the relations between ideas could lead the mind closer to the bearers of philosophical truth, clear and distinct ideas, known passively by “the light of reason.” For the latter, the laws of thought simply are the “laws of truth” (to use Frege’s phrase), or a general logic is just thereby a logic of objects, because all philosophical truth is what Kant would call “analytic,” arrived at by logical analysis alone. And since, under the impact of modern science, universals were no longer the “truly real” structural elements of the universe, relations of ideas no longer could be understood as mapping out relations in reality in that way. Mary Tiles summarizes it well. She says that Kant is insistent that

general logic cannot yield any knowledge [of objects], or any rules of the understanding pertaining to acquisition of knowledge of objects. A conceptual relation established on the basis of logical conceptual analysis may be empty because there are no objects falling under the concepts concerned. General logic can only establish logical possibilities and impossibilities. It provides only a negative touchstone of truth, avoidance of formal contradiction.5

And she further notes,

General logic is merely a logic of the relation of ideas, of the comparison of concepts. And the possible relations can be quickly exhausted: they are, inclusion, exclusion and overlap.6

So where should we place Hegel? In this, as in so many other respects, he is, I have already suggested, firmly in the post-Kantian world, something already indicated by his distancing himself in §24 from how metaphysics had been understood, as identifying thoughts with the “essentialities” of things. With general logic understood as it was in the Port Royal and the Wolffian traditions, he agrees that logical reasoning, understood in that way, does not provide knowledge of objects. He especially agrees with Kant that reason and the understanding are activities, not passively “illuminated.” As “that great foe of immediacy,” in Sellars’s phrase, he does not mention or rely on such receptive or noetic intuition. As such a great foe, Hegel is opposed to any notion of self-standing, atomic conceptual content. As he wants so famously to show in a dialectical logic, determinateness is a function of determination, always an identification “through an other,” his formulation for discursivity.7 And the most comprehensive account we have of how Hegel wants us to understand two-thirds of his Logic, the “objective logic,” is: “What has been called objective logic here would correspond in part to what for him [Kant] is transcendental logic” (21.47). (As we shall see in detail, it is significant that Hegel also wrote Niethammer in 1812 that the objective logic roughly corresponds to Aristotle’s ontology. Strikingly, he understood that ontology to be presented in the Organon, Aristotle’s six works on logic [L, 277].)8 Admittedly, he is not always as clear as he might be about this. In the history of philosophy lectures, he also notes a fundamental “Nachteil,” deficiency or disadvantage of Aristotle’s logic, that the bearing of logic on ontology is not clear to Aristotle, and that in his treatment, “forms” are treated too “formally”: “Its failure [this treatment of form] is not that they are only forms, but that [the notion of true] form is lacking [sondern Form fehlt]” (W 19: 239).

Just a brief glance at the Logic indicates a general structure that helps explain such a claim about Kant. The logic of being seems clearly to correspond to the Kantian categories of quality and quantity, what Kant called the mathematical and constitutive categories, and the logic of essence certainly seems to correspond to the categories of relation and modality, or the dynamical and regulative categories. The logic of the Concept makes use of the same syllogistic central to Kant’s conception of the role of such an inferential structure in the activity of reason, the third major part of the Critique, but Hegel, often discussing issues that Kant would consider part of general logic, treats such a topic as a culmination. And then Hegel puts the main point he wants to make, in agreeing with Kant about transcendental logic, as clearly as it can be put:

The objective logic thus takes the place rather of the former metaphysics which was supposed to be the scientific edifice of the world as constructed by thoughts alone. (21.48)9

As we shall see, Hegel does not understand transcendental logic, and so the “problem of objects,” in the same way as Kant, but it is important to note how Hegel states his allegiances. I take these passages and others I will cite below to indicate that Hegel accepts Kant’s critique of rationalist metaphysics and wants to fold it into his own account; that he accepts that there is no way that a determination of the logically possible (the mere avoidance of contradiction) can contribute to any knowledge about what is the case, and that this was the cardinal error of modern rationalism. This is not to say that Hegel thinks there is no metaphysical import to a reconceived transcendental logic, as we shall see. But there is no question that Hegel both wholeheartedly agreed with Kant’s critique of substantive metaphysics, and realized that that critique applied only to modern metaphysics and left several possibilities open. When discussing Kant’s critique of rationalist psychology as paradigmatic for the critique of metaphysics, he notes,

What Kant generally has in mind here is the state of the metaphysics of his time which, as a rule, stayed at these one-sided determinations with no hint of dialectic; he neither paid attention to, nor examined, the genuinely speculative ideas of older philosophers on the concept of spirit. (12.194)10

Finally, for both Kant and Hegel, the unit of significance for any logic is not the proposition or any static formal structure but acts of reasoning and assertion, and so the logic that is a model for both transcendental logic and Hegelian science is still judgmental, raising as an inevitable question the status of “subjectivity” in logic, the issue that bothered Frege. Or, said more precisely, Hegel’s logic does not primarily concern relations among, operations upon, propositions, and is instead oriented from a logic of terms. So we don’t see a syntax specified by axioms, a proof theory, and a semantics. Conceptual relations among basic concepts, moments of “the Concept,” make up the content, like the relations between the concepts of finitude and infinity, one and many, essence and appearance, substance and attribute, being and essence. But as becomes clearer in the logic of the Concept, conceptual content is not provided by analysis of atomistically conceived concepts. Concepts are understood, as they were in Kant, as “predicates of possible judgments,” and the roles they play in possible judgments in various contexts, involving other concepts, and the roles they can and cannot play in such judgments (including the inferential relations among the judgments) are necessary to specify such concepts. This is why Hegel metaphorically speaks of concepts as alive, in movement, and why the logic’s “motion” is the key to the specification of any concept (that is, any concept understood as a necessary moment in the Concept, the concepts necessary for anything at all to be determined).11 Concepts are rules for judgmental unification, and judgmental unification is always apperceptive. (Judging and the consciousness of judging are not two acts but one.) So the structure of concepts in use is the structure of the apperceptive “I.” (As we shall see in chapter 3, being’s intelligibility as “reflected being,” its division into essence and appearance, being’s being and not being its appearances, is the objective correlate of the I’s self-relation.)12 The concept of the Concept, the apperceptive understanding of the implications of this apperceptive structure, is what Hegel calls “the Absolute.”

Here then is a typical account by Hegel of the subject matter of The Science of Logic. Hegel tells us only that the work concerns “the science of pure thinking” (Wissenschaft des reinen Denkens), and he goes on in that passage to say that it is

the science that has pure knowledge for its principle and is a unity which is not abstract but living and concrete, so that the opposition of consciousness between a being subjectively existing for itself, and another but objectively existing such being, has been overcome in it, and being is known to be in itself a pure concept and the pure concept to be true being. These, then, are the two moments contained in logic. But they are now known to exist inseparably, not as in consciousness, where each exists for itself; it is for this reason and this reason alone, because they are at the same time known to be distinct [unterschiedene] (yet not to exist for themselves), that their unity is not abstract, dead and inert, but concrete. (21.45)13

Everything distinctive about Hegel’s approach is contained in that paragraph, so we should proceed slowly, especially with respect to its key claim, which comes in two parts: (i) first, a double claim of identity—that being is itself a pure concept, and such a pure concept is being. That would certainly establish a relationship between logic and metaphysics: one of identity. Yet this is supposed to be so even as (ii) he warns us that this identity is of quite a special sort, one paradoxically compatible with their continuing distinctness.14

There is a form of this sort of claim of identity in John McDowell’s Mind and World that can be helpful here. This is so because in McDowell’s view we can certainly distinguish thinking from what is thought (the world is not a thought-thing; thinking is a discursive activity; the world is not a discursive activity) and still insist that the world “is made up of the sort of things one can think.”15 (That discursive activity is, in its unity, the unity of anything that can be known would be expressed on the “object side” by claiming that a determinate object is articulable as a single unity.) Or, for example, the profound-sounding (even Heideggerian) claim that there is no ontological gap between thought and world just comes down to the fact that “one can think, for instance, that spring has begun, and that very same thing, that spring has begun, can be the case.”16 What I think when I know (think truly) that something is the case is simply what is the case. It is thus a truism of sorts that, with the issue posed in a Kantian way, “the forms of thought are the forms of things.” This will have a Kantian spin if we note that “the form of things” for Kant is relativized to the forms of intuition, space and time, and that route requires a qualification, that the forms are “only subjective.” This seems to take back with one hand (the subjective forms) what was given with the other (the form of the extraconceptual, the form of things). This is, quite rightly by my lights, how McDowell wants to treat the preferability of Hegel’s over against Kant’s (official or received) form of idealism. The distinction between “conditions on the possibility of knowledge of things” and “conditions on the possibility of things themselves,” which some use to characterize Kant’s idealism, should be rejected “on the ground that the relevant conditions are inseparably both conditions on thought and conditions on objects, not primarily either the one or the other.”17

The difficult issues concern not what I know when I know what is the case, but how I can be in a position to know what is the case, either empirically (because I have seen the signs of spring) or, especially, when the claim is specific, a particular “condition” known a priori, e.g., that every event has a cause. (We could also say that while this must be what it is to think what is the case, we have not thereby explained how it is possible to do so. For Hegel, we can explain it only by explaining the identity and difference of thinking and being, a point he will address in the “determinations of reflection.”) This is the kind of realism Hegel espouses (and Husserl at his core, apart from his Cartesian animadversions).18 Here is Hegel’s formulation.

The older metaphysics had in this respect a higher concept of thinking than now passes as the accepted opinion. For it presupposed as its principle that only what is known of things and in things by thought is really true [wahrhaft Wahre] in them, that is, what is known in them not in their immediacy but as first elevated to the form of thinking, as things of thought. This metaphysics thus held that thinking and the determination of thinking are not something alien to the subject matters, but are rather their essence, or that the things and the thinking of them agree in and for themselves (also our language expresses a kinship between them); that thinking in its immanent determinations, and the true nature of things, are one and the same content. (SL 21.29)

It will be important (for Hegel, at any rate), as we shall see shortly, that this account of an “identity” (“one and the same content”) is true of philosophical or speculative thinking, thinking that has as its subject matter “true being” or “actuality.” Hence the identity within difference of being and thinking, the core principle of Hegel’s version of rationalism.19 In other words, there is an “identity” between “pure thinking’s moments” (suitably well defined) and “any possible object of pure thinking,” or pure thinking’s “truth.” It is an identity within difference because the speculative claim does not mean that the world, what seems other than thinkings, must nevertheless be “thinkings.” It does not, any more than true thoughts (judgments) are true by virtue of the world’s being thoughts. Once we understand the necessary dependence of any true thinking about anything on pure thinking, and once we understand what constitutes pure thinking (especially its “spontaneity”), and once we understand the “moments” necessary for pure thinking to be pure thinking, we have established thereby the truth abut what there is. (The necessity of these moments in knowing anything at all is crucial to the case; showing their necessity, and defending the presuppositionlessness of beginning with the knowability of anything at all, is in effect the Hegelian “deduction,” what replaces Kant’s appeal to the subjective forms of intuition.)

In fact, McDowell’s remarks can be taken to be a useful gloss on Hegel’s well-known remarks in the introduction of the Phenomenology of Spirit that we should not draw a “sharp line [schlechthin scheidende Grenze] separating cognition from the Absolute” (PhG §73). If we do, we shall be tempted to think of what we know when we know something as some “intermediary” or mental representation or abstract object (proposition), and not what is the case. And just as in McDowell’s insistence, we can be misled by taking our bearings at the outset from knowledge claims that are in fact false. Here is Hegel’s version of exactly that warning.20

Meanwhile, if the anxiety about falling into error sets up a mistrust of science, which itself is untroubled by those scruples and simply sets itself to its work and actually gets down to cognizing, then it is difficult to see why there should not be instead a mistrust of this mistrust, that is, why there should not be an anxiety over whether the fear of error is not already the error itself. (PhG §74)21

There have been several objections to what is taken to be this “conflation” (aka “identification”) of “proposition and fact,” and these perfectly parallel the same sorts of criticism of Hegel, by E. Tugendhat,22 for one. W. Künne, for example, has cited several of these objections to what he and others call, in a Hegelian phrase, the “identity” theory of truth (“Idem”).23 He himself is convinced by the consideration that we individuate facts less finely than true propositions. (The fact that you never met Cassius Clay is the same as the fact that you never met Muhammad Ali, but the propositions are different.)24 But the issue is not any sort of general identification of proposition and facts (as if McDowell must believe that the world is made up of propositions). The right account of the semantic content of the assertion is not at issue: our bearings are taken first by attention to what one knows when one actually knows, and in this case it is the absence of some event in the world—my never having met a certain person. And more importantly, the propositional move inevitably commits us to saying that what one knows in knowing is, of a proposition, that it is true. But that is not what one knows. One knows of spring that it has begun.25 And what is of interest to Hegel, complicating matters, is the sense in which the “Concept” is not “being in and for itself,” as well as “is.” (Again, he does not claim to identify the world with judgments about it.) Moreover, empirical knowledge (“spring has sprung”) is not fully self-conscious knowledge, is possible under unacknowledged presuppositions, and so the “completion” of knowledge will ultimately turn out to be the Concept’s relation to itself, the Concept of the Concept, and therewith “complete” identity.26 It will take a while—the rest of the book in fact—to formulate an interpretation of just what this means. Therein lies the whole tale, but the “difference” between Concept and “being in and for itself” is not of the sort that would reinstitute a skeptical problem.27

Hegel’s formulations of this point can be somewhat startlingly blunt. In EL §167, in differentiating a judgment, as considered by logic, from any psychological treatment, he says,

every thing is a judgment [alle Dinge sind ein Urteil].28—That is, every thing is a singular [Einzelnes] which is inwardly a universality [Allgemeinheit] or inner nature, in other words a universal that is made singular; universality and singularity distinguish themselves within it, but at the same time they are identical.

A thing, in its determinate intelligibility, has a judgmental structure, a “singularized universal,” about which of course much more has to be said. This is an analogue of his understanding of concepts as, following Kant, synthetic unities, functions in judgments. Hegel is very clear that we should not think of concepts or universals as special sorts of individuated things. They are moments of an activity, which activity is being treated logically (normatively), not psychologically (factually). This is what makes it possible that the world “is made up of the sort of thing one can think.” And, again, considering a thing in terms of its intelligibility is nothing like a restriction to what “we could make sense of.” Unintelligible things (trivially the same notion as “things that we can render intelligible”) can be contemplated in the way an unintelligible logic can be contemplated: as an impossibility.29

There are two other implications of this approach for Hegel’s canonical formulations of his position, and we will encounter them frequently. If “truth” does not involve knowing of a proposition that it corresponds to reality, then correspondence is not the issue at all. As noted, the epistemological question is still a serious one: how could we come to be in the position to know what is the case and assert it, in both observational and “logical” contexts? What happens when we go wrong? But we are already headed in a direction that starts to line up with Hegel’s position. For his frequent formulation is that, at bottom, speculative truth, Hegel’s concern in the SL, is a matter not of thought’s correspondence with reality, but of “thought’s agreement with itself.” The position just described leaves open the possibility that the categorical form of any claim to truth is not derived or observed, but a matter of “thought’s self-determination,” and in that sense a matter of thought’s agreeing with itself. In nonspeculative contexts, this means that, in a genuine judgment (not a mere proposition, a distinction we still have to set out), a thing agrees more or less with, better or worse exemplifies, its concept. “That is a good house.” “That action is wrong.”30 At the speculative level, either a putative concept (“essence”) agrees with, exemplifies, what it is supposed to be as such a concept, a principle of intelligibility that accounts for determinateness, or it falls short and must be reformulated. This is generally true of philosophical claims of any substance and involves the way in which the authority of reason must be self-authorizing. The binding force of such a thinking, a judgment (a taking to be true), is thought itself. In a judgment like “Humans are political animals,” the world is not impressing itself on us, making adherence to such a truth unavoidable, creating a kind of force we cannot resist. The force of a judgment is judgment’s own force; it is not a natural force or the result of the accumulation of empirical data.31

Everything, of course, depends on how the notion of categorically self-determining development of the notion of conceptuality itself is explained, first in Kant and then in Hegel, for the task of the Logic depends on its correct articulation. (That thought could be said to “require something of itself,” that intelligible thought requires a unity of self-consciousness that could never “come to us” through the senses, is the nervus probandi of Kant’s deduction, and the argument form plays a role in Hegel as well.) And in empirical cases, cognition, if it is cognition, thereby excludes everything inconsistent with the claim. Thought’s “agreeing with itself”—excluding inconsistencies and accepting implications—is what constitutes the claim as cognition. What can be said to alert us that our assertion has misfired is not anything like the brute recalcitrance of reality to being so described, our assertion not “fitting” it, but what else we know about what is the case that is inconsistent with what we claim. Thought is not agreeing with itself.

Such an insistence on distinctness in the 21.45 quotation above at least makes it immediately clear that Hegel cannot be saying (any more than McDowell is saying) that what there is is an abstract, immaterial entity or entities, in the way a realist might understand universals, or an idea-monist or a pantheist would understand everything, or a Platonist might understand ideas. It is confusion on this point that renders most conventional summaries of Hegel’s position so immediately problematic. Then there would just or only be such universals or ideas, or mind, really or in truth; there would be no continuing “distinctness,” nothing “unterschiedene.”32 Any claim of a mind thinking such a thought would have to be a manifestation of such being, which immediately undermines the notion of a mind thinking such a thought.

An earlier specification of this identity in the introduction gives us a deeper clue about how to proceed and raises a theme that is interwoven everywhere in the Logic, but that, I would claim, still has not been successfully interpreted. The passage involves a much more Hegelian specification of what he meant by “being” in that “being-concept” identity claim:

As science, truth is pure self-consciousness as it develops itself and has the shape of the self, so that that which exists in and for itself is the known [gewußte] concept and the concept as such is that which exists in and for itself. (21.33, my emphasis)33

“That which exists in and for itself” obviously introduces many more complications than reference to mere “being.” What could it be for something to exist “for itself”? Why is it identical to the “known, gewußte, concept”? And what does he mean by adding that “known” to the “concept”? (Why not just say identical to the concept, as he would if he were a concept realist?)

The situation is immediately quite complicated. To some extent, part of Hegel’s debt to Aristotle emerges here.34 In his lectures on Aristotle, Hegel aligns himself with the goal of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, as the “science of that which is insofar as it is and what belongs to it in and for itself.”35 Entities are the determinate entities they are “in terms of” or “because of” their concept or substantial form. Such a form accounts for such determinacy. As Aristotle puts it in a canonical formulation from Metaphysics Z:

And since the existence of the thing must already be given, it is clear that the question must be why the matter is so-and-so. For instance, the question may be ‘Why are these things here a house?’ (And the answer is ‘Because what being is for a house belongs to them’), or it may be ‘Why is this thing here a man?,’ or ‘Why is this body in this state a man?’ So what is sought is the cause by which the matter is so-and-so, i.e. the form. And that is the substance. (1041b3–8, my emphasis)36

Such entities embody some measure of what it is truly to be such a thing and instantiate such a “why the matter is so-and-so” to a greater or lesser degree. A wolf is not simply, in itself, what it is to be a wolf but to some degree or other a better or worse exemplification of such a concept “for itself.” The object is not just “as it is”; it is “for” (here, in the sense of “for the sake of”) its concept and hereby itself. (A merely “existing” wolf is thus not an “actual” wolf. The latter would involve truly being for itself, the realization of wolfness. Hegel will tell us later that the subject matter of the SL is “actuality,” not existence, and will mean something similar.)37 This is all in keeping with Hegel’s general tendency to gloss his use of for-itself with Aristotle’s notion of an actualized potential, an energeia, actus, or in Hegel Wirklichkeit, and in-itself as dynamis, potentia, or, in Hegel, Möglichkeit.38 To say that an object is “for its form” is just to say that there is an intelligible dynamic in its development. (As in Aristotle, the particular kind of unity by which any thing or process or activity is what it distinctly is is the unity by virtue of which it is intelligible.)39 Various aspects or elements or moments make sense in terms of the concept of the thing. This intelligible dynamic is its concept and is not something that exists separate from or supervening on some physical attributes and efficient causation. It just is the intelligible way a development develops; there is nothing “over and above” the development.40

A full statement of Hegel’s debt to Aristotle, especially with respect to the crucial terms of his project, is given in the Encyclopedia.

More precisely, therefore, Aristotle’s polemic against Plato consists in his designation of the Platonic idea as mere δύναμις, and in urging, on the contrary, that the Idea, which is recognized by both of them equally to be alone what is true, should be regarded essentially as ἐνέργεια, i.e. the inwardness that is totally to the fore, so that it is the unity of inward and outward. In other words the Idea should be regarded as actuality in the emphatic sense that we have given it here. [d. h. als das Innere, welches schlechthin heraus ist, somit als die Einheit des Inneren und Äußeren oder als die Wirklichkeit in dem hier besprochenen emphatischen Sinne des Wortes zu betrachten sei.] (§142Z)41

To some extent, though, the “for itself” term has its proper home in Hegel’s logic of being (where there is a section discussing the notion), and that has something to do, Hegel explains, with what the term colloquially sounds like, as when I say, “I’m in this for myself” (SL 21.145).42 In more logical terms, it concerns a certain putative idea of an internally determined identity of some conceptual content, “for itself,” rather than its being what it is by its being determined by its relation with others, by being for others. (This separation or strict duality between a determinacy wholly for itself and one “for an other” will turn out to be a false opposition in the logic of being. In fact it is the main point of such a logic of being to demonstrate just that—the complementarity rather than opposition of such notions.)

Even though this is so (that “for itself” and “for an other” will be reciprocally dependent notions), the general notion of a being in and for itself has introduced the idea of being as determinate and intelligible being. It is what it is and not anything else (it is “in itself”), but only by virtue of the properties that can intelligibly distinguish it from its contraries (can determine what it is “for itself”). Its determinacy is a matter of both a plurality and a unity of determinations, or thought-determinations, or predicates or concepts.43

But of course ordinary beings do not assert themselves for themselves, claim to be for themselves what they are, so Hegel quickly turns to modes of thought’s determining such determinacy. (Hegel does not add “known,” gewußte, to concept arbitrarily. As he keeps insisting, a concept is a “thought-determination,” and that “determination” is the result of some act of determining, or predication.)44 Accordingly, everything, I want to suggest, turns on the sweeping claim that “truth [the truth of being, the determination of what things truly are] is self-consciousness [the forms of self-conscious judgment].”45 That is, an object (an empirical object, a domain of some kind of objects, an event, a relation between events, a possibility, a value) makes sense as existing in and for itself within what Hegel calls “the science of things in thought,” or the “science of pure thinking.” In that sense, it is to be considered as it is (in itself, in its determinate way of being) but therewith also in its intelligibility, in the light of its sufficient reason to be as it is, the modality of its determinate intelligibility. And it is intelligible only as conceived, as rendered intelligible, by thought. This does not claim it exists only as conceived, or that the conceiving on which its determinacy depends should be understood as subjective mental episodes. And we have already seen how Hegel wants to differentiate his understanding from how a Leibnizian would understand such an appeal to sufficient reason. At this point, all we know about his own approach is that he does not think we are left with just General Logic, as understood by Kant or Frege, and empirical acquisition of knowledge. What else? is the main question. Thought can determine its objects, but not by appeal to the light of reason, not “immediately.” We recall: two-thirds of the Logic corresponds to Kant’s transcendental Logic and is the successor to pre-Kantian metaphysics. Much more will have to be said about this, but it will be very important to Hegel that to consider things in their intelligibility is also and at the same time to consider them in terms of the only beings for whom beings can be intelligible, rational beings. (The question of their intelligibility does not make sense otherwise.) And rational intelligibility is self-conscious intelligibility, discursive mental acts of such rendering intelligible, undertaken as such. A similar form of reasoning can be found in Frege: a language cannot contain a representation of objects, unless it also contains predicative expressions. This also means that an intellect cannot have the power of apprehending objects unless it has the power of thinking something of them, of apprehending Fregean concepts.46 This is already a metaphysics—of objects and concepts. Frege will add relations and, down the line, numbers.

One could say something similar about Kant (although he would not): that S-is-P form already embodies a metaphysics, requires a distinction between substances and properties, entities that could be subject to that form. This is certainly true for Hegel of traditional syllogism. “All men are mortal; Socrates is a man; therefore Socrates is mortal” expresses the relation between universality, individuality, and particularity, a metaphysical commitment about distinctions necessary for the world to be an intelligible world, a world that could make any sense, not “sense for us.”

This position is not easy to state clearly, mostly because orienting oneself in Hegel from a broadly Kantian perspective can seem to many, understandably, to require positions Hegel explicitly rejects, like any distinction between things considered in terms of their possible intelligibility and things considered simply as they are in themselves. For numerous reasons we shall confront, Hegel thinks this distinction disguises numerous confusions. But, on the other hand, this “identification” does not mean that he is concluding something about the world from some intelligibility or logical requirement, in the manner of Descartes concluding from the fact that I can clearly distinguish mind and body that they must be distinct, that one order establishes something about the other order. This distinction between such orders is what is being denied in Hegel’s Logic, even while (and here another massive turn of the difficulty screw) he is not identifying things with thoughts or interpreting thought’s determination of itself as of metaphysical significance because such self-determination is the manifestation of some cosmic entity’s (the Absolute’s) knowledge of itself.47

Further, we should of course be wary of attributing to Hegel psychologism or subjective idealism, but we should not be so wary that we lose touch completely with the fact that The Science of Logic is the science of such acts, construed “logically,” that is, with respect to rendering anything properly intelligible, giving its proper sufficient reason to be as it is. There are of course many various sorts of such sufficient reasons, and so the task of the SL must be quite ambitiously comprehensive, especially since Hegel will object to any claim of radical incommensurability among such grounds. Hegel is a monist in this sense, a logical monist. There are no incommensurable spheres of rational intelligibility—cognitive, moral, aesthetic—as there are, say, in Kant.48 (And even Kant struggled to be able to appeal to the same general logical framework—his “architectonic”—of intelligibility in presenting both the second and third Critique.) But the initial, simple point at issue now is that anything’s being at all would be mere indeterminate and indistinguishable being were it not conceptually determinate, articulable—in the simplest sense, an instance of a concept. As in Aristotle’s Metaphysics, to be anything is to be a determinate something, and that principle of determination can be considered “for itself.” It is what Hegel calls “the Concept” (what Aristotle called substantial form).49 As he says,

the nature, the specific essence, that which is truly permanent and substantial in the manifold and accidentality of appearance and fleeting externalization, is the concept of the thing, the universal which is present in it. (SL 21.15)

And this raises Hegel’s main question in the Logic: how to account for conceptual content, or as he would put it, conceptual determinacy, given the various modalities of the possibility of object determinacy. The answer to that question will depend on two very difficult elements in Hegel’s project: the claim quoted earlier that the form of the concept is the form of a self, and that, accordingly, the truth is self-consciousness; and the claim that the way to understand this content is to understand these concepts as “self-negating,” but in a way that promises a positive result. These are also the elements in Hegel’s account which will contribute to an explanation of how he thinks an a priori determination of objective content is possible, given his disagreement with Kant’s supposedly overly “subjective” account.

Metaphysics
But to return to the identity claim, what do we mean by “metaphysics”? We might again take our bearings from Aristotle. What there is must be determinate. At the metaphysical level, anything’s “determinations” are just the general predicates without which any specific determination would not be possible, the forms of any such possible specific determination. For Aristotle, the task of metaphysics is not to say of any particular thing what it is, nor does it deduce what beings there are. That is the task of the special sciences. Metaphysics’ task is to determine what must be true of anything at all, such that what it is in particular can be determined (or: what is necessarily presupposed in any such specification).50 Hegel agrees. That is the conception of metaphysics intended in the quotations just cited. As with Aristotle, this link between the order of thinking (knowing, judging to be the case) and the order of being is not an inference, does not face a gap that must be closed by an inference. Properly understood, the relation is one of identity (a conceptual identity, not an ontological identity).

It especially concerns itself with concepts and distinctions that are as fundamental as the following but that immediately have the air of paradox. How can not-being be? Given the infinite divisibility of a continuum, how is motion possible? What accounts for the identity of an object, or of a person, throughout alterations in time? What kinds of objects are numbers, if they are objects at all? How is consciousness possible in a material being? And so forth. The general distinction drawn by McDowell is the most important to keep in mind.

The concepts of propositional attitudes have their proper home in explanations of a special sort: explanations in which things are made intelligible by being revealed to be, or to approximate to being, as they rationally ought to be. This is to be contrasted with a style of explanation in which one makes things intelligible by representing their coming into being as a particular instance of how things generally tend to happen.51

Being revealed to be a manifestation of some order of reason will require that we understand how there could be such an order of reason and what it consists in. That is the task of the Science of Logic. And it remains deeply Aristotelian in spirit. As in

what we seek is the cause, i.e., the form, by reason of which the matter is some definite thing; and this is the substance of the thing. (Metaphysics 1041b7–9)

As we have seen, logic has emerged in Kant as something much more than the study of valid forms of inference, but much less than an account of the laws that thinking does or ought to obey, or as categorizing a basic ontological structure. It states the conditions of possible sense, the distinctions and relations without which sense would not be possible. For Hegel this ambition already represents a task of great philosophical substance. It is the way he wants to understand the question of the validity of the categories, their “truth,” as he says, “in and for itself.”52 The questions that emerge from Hegel’s “expansion” of Kant’s logic are how we determine what those conditions are and whether they can be rightly confined to what the avoidance of logical contradiction will allow, whether the “emptiness” that Kant ascribes to these forms can be maintained.

This is the beginning of an issue that we will return to several times. Kant seemed to say that because pure concepts can stand in no immediate relation to objects, such that object-content must be supplied “from without,” philosophical or a priori knowledge cannot determine anything about what there is. Pure reason could, though, determine a new modality of possibility, “real possibility” (to be distinguished from mere logical possibility). This determination of what could “really” be is not achieved by the understanding alone. It is due to there being an a priori form of representation for all given content, the pure forms of intuition. The Metaphysical Deduction establishes the kind of involvement of the understanding in the availability of any manifold that demonstrates what must be the case for anything to be the object it is, but “only” as an object of experience, an appearance. Since Hegel relies on no such representation of givenness, it might seem, has seemed to many, that he means to assert against Kant that concepts can stand in an immediate relation to objects, thus reinstituting the rationalist claim to have a priori direct knowledge of the real as it is in itself. But this is to saddle Hegel with a host of Kantian assumptions he does not share. The Logic is never said to seek a determination of what is “really” real, and, in a way like Kant, it also concerns the determination of the possibility, the real possibility, of anything being what it is. Hegel calls this Wirklichkeit, actuality, and distinguishes it often from questions about existence. As noted above with Aristotle, the task is to say of anything not what it is but what it must be such that a determination of what it is could be possible. As we shall see in chapter 7, for Hegel to claim that “Life” is a logical concept is to say not that there could not be a world that did not have living beings in it, but that if there is a world at all, the denial that there is any distinction between mechanically explicable and organically unified beings is self-contradictory. It is a way of arguing against absolute mechanism, and this involves his typical and always extraordinarily ambitious claim: that life must be said to be the “truth” of mechanism. This is not the deduction of the necessity of living beings. It is a determination of Hegel’s version of the really possible: actuality.

So what Hegel means by saying that logic is metaphysics, or that being in and for itself is the concept, can be put this way.53 Once we understand the role of, say, essence and appearance as necessary for judging objectively, we have thereby made sense of essences and appearances, and therewith, the world in which they are indispensable. (We have made sense not of some species-specific feature of human sense-makers, but of the sense the world could make.)54 The basic unit of sense-making, in Aristotle, in Kant, and in a revised way in Hegel, is the predicative act. In making sense of this way of sense-making, its presuppositions and implications, we are making sense of what there is, the only sense anything could make. (A phrase of Aryeh Kosman’s in discussing Aristotle is relevant here: “predication is nothing but the logical or discursive face of being.”)55 What there is must be determinate, and its “determinations” are just its predicates, the content of which depends on their roles in possible judgments. (We will discuss in a moment Kant’s great anxiety about this way of proceeding.)

Now, this level of abstraction can obscure a number of important differences. One sense of the “forms of thought” could involve only the notion of logic as contentless in Kant’s sense, perhaps tautologous in the early Wittgensteinian sense, the mere constitutive forms of any possible sense or intelligibility, the negation of which is not in any carefully considered sense at all conceivable.56 (Or perhaps one might want to say that the very constituents of any possible sense cannot thereby themselves make sense; they delimit possible sense without themselves being sensible.) When Kant called logic “the science of the rules of understanding in general” (CPR A52/B76), he meant to set out what constitutes possible thought as such, not what we, as human beings, could make sense of, or the rules we ought to be following, but just what could be sense.57 But what interests Hegel about any such delimitation is what interests Kant too; it is the general idea of the suitability of such absolutely universal forms of sense, no matter our actual theory of formal logic, for a consideration of any possible thought of objects—in Kant the relation between general and transcendental logic. This involves the immediate bearing of such logical form on the question of possible thought of objects: the bearing, say, of the subject-predicate form on the thought of substances and properties; the bearing of antecedent-consequence relations for the thought of necessary connections among events. This notion of such an immediate bearing is proposed by Kant independent of any transcendental deduction, and one can understand a great deal of Hegel as emanating from a claim about Kant’s so-called Metaphysical Deduction—to wit, that there is a lot of philosophy already involved in such a “deduction” and that it is an achievement. This means that for Hegel, the direct bearing of a general logic on any possible transcendental logic is actually another way of stating the identity claim in §24 of the EL, and is not a mere restating or reorganizing of logical facts of the matter. (In Kantian language, the claim of EL §24 would be that functions of judgment are categories.)58 It involves the intimation on Kant’s part of the speculative “identity” Hegel had announced, quoted earlier, and so it is of much greater importance than Kant admitted for understanding the proper philosophical specification of these forms of thought, especially in their interrelation to each other. (The actual Kantian statement of this “identity” is the highest principle of synthetic judgments, and it invokes the same thought: that the conditions for the possibility of experience are at the same time the conditions for the possibility of objects of experience. Or it can be so read when we realize that the “subjectivity” referred to in the “conditions for the possibility of experience” clause refers to what Hegel would call an “absolute” subjectivity, one that refers to an unlimited or unbounded notion of subjectivity, not Kant’s official “finite” subjectivity, defined by the role of the pure forms of intuition.)

So it is of some significance in Kant that the forms of possible thought already determine, already in some sense are, the only possible forms of the thought of things, that the logical constitution of possible sense is the form of the only possible sense that can be made of things; or it is of some direct significance that the subject-predicate form should have anything to do with substances and properties in the world. It is, let us say, the intimacy or even inseparability between general and transcendental logic that interests Hegel. (Ultimately Hegel will want to claim that it is not the case that general logic as Kant understands it should be seen as something like a basic form to which content is “added.” Rather the basic form of possible thought, rendering intelligible, is content-directed, and any general logic is an abstraction from such modes of thinking. We will need to see more in the following chapter about the apperceptive character of thinking, even in general logic, before that point can be made clearer.)

Stated in Kant’s terms, the Metaphysical Deduction can be established before we supposedly learn, as a result of the Deduction, that given our sensible forms of intuition, all that being a substance bearing properties could be “for us” is the permanent in time undergoing temporal alterations, or all that necessary connection between events could amount to “for us” is necessary succession according to a rule. And Hegel will give us other reasons for thinking that the relation between the general and the transcendental logic is more intimate than had been realized. Stated another way, for Hegel, thought’s reflective determination of its own possibility (an “access” to itself confirmed by simply thinking, since any thinking is also at the same time consciousness of thinking) has immediate consequences for the objects of thought. The idea of an object conceived as not an object of thought, as unthinkable, is an idle, self-canceling thought.

So, as Adrian Moore in his recent book on the history of metaphysics points out in his account of Frege, if one attributes to Frege the task of making sense of mathematical sense, how different can that be from attributing to him the task of making sense of mathematics?59 And here is a formulation in Moore worthy of Hegel:

To make sense of things at the highest level of generality . . . is to make sense of things in terms of what it is to make sense of things; it is to be guided by the sheer nature of the enterprise. To attempt to do that is necessarily to reflect on one’s own activity, and to try to make sense, in particular, of the sense that one makes of things.60

Just so; perfect Hegelese. We can also state the point in Brandomese. There is a kind of sense dependence between metaphysically conceived “things” and ways of making sense, but not a reference dependence. So the claim that “logic” is “metaphysics” would not mean that finite particulars depend for their existence on the referring expressions that pick them out, or that they exist only when being thought, or that “really” there are no spatio-temporal finite particulars in the normal sense but just artifacts, perhaps mental or ideal artifacts, of our ways of sorting things out. Rather, as Robert Brandom puts it,

the concepts of singular term and object are reciprocally sense-dependent. One cannot understand either without at least implicitly understanding the other and the basic relations between them.61

He makes the same sort of sense dependence case for “a fact” and “what is assertable in a proposition”; likewise between “law and necessity” on the one hand, and “counterfactually robust inference” on the other. And he generally tries to establish this kind of dependence between modally robust material exclusions in reality and subjective processes for identifying such exclusions and trying to avoid incompatible commitments.

Brandom’s own formulations about the question of the status of the “logical” concepts interrogated by Hegel in the SL sound very close to the line pursued here, but with a couple of critical differences, and it would be useful to stress those similarities and differences.

On the “similarity” side, consider:

I take it that Hegel’s distinctively philosophical, logical, or speculative (a translation common in English versions of Hegel for his “begreifende”) concepts—including the “form determinations of the Concept” with which the Science of Logic is principally concerned—have a characteristic expressive role that is quite different from that of ordinary, nonphilosophical concepts. Their job is not to make explicit how the world is (to subserve a function of consciousness) but rather to make explicit the process of making explicit how the world is (to enable and embody a kind of self-consciousness).62

Here too we would have to say that this sort of conception of the logical task cannot be understood as of no relevance to what could be an object of empirical inquiry. In Brandom’s terms, if the process of discrimination and explanation at the empirical level requires, must assume, strong modal realism, alethic material relations of impossibility, exclusion, preclusion, and material inference, then the logical level cannot be conceived formally. These are metaphysical and unrevisable conditions.

But Brandom does not want to accept such a characterization, and so there are two important differences between his account and the one defended here. In the first place, Brandom’s account of “making explicit the process of making explicit” is fundamentally retrospective in a strong sense. That is, any “progressive” empirical inquiry (which, for Brandom, as for Hegel, involves meaning change, often radical, not just information accumulation), in our interactions with the world, experience of recalcitrant observations, anomalies, discoveries, and so forth, is the basic process that then calls for a retrospective and analyic reconstruction, making explicit, of the process of empirical making explicit itelf. It is the latter, empirical inquiry that is the source of the contentful internal negation in the process that is then thematized at the logical level.

We have seen enough of Hegel’s formulations to know that a philosophical logic has a much more ambitious program: not just recounting the assumptions emerging in the empirical process of concept revision, but accounting for presuppositions of such a process without which any empirical making explicit and revision would not be possible. There is a self-transforming logic inherent in that logical level itself, and it makes a claim of necessity. The Science of Logic makes explicit that without which an empirical making explicit would not be possible, not what turns out to be assumed in its empirical self-transformation, where that empirical self-transformation is the “engine” on which a Science of Logic rides. This involves metaphysical commitments in the sense we have been exploring here. So this formulation by Bandom is too weak to capture what Hegel is after.

On this view, determinateness—like truth and knowledge of how things objectively are—is a concept with real and important application; the kind of normative assessment it codifies is not dissolved in a corrosive anything-goes skeptical soup. (Hegel’s image is “the night in which all cows are black.”) But it has become a diachronic, functional concept, applicable only in virtue of the role a concept plays in an expressively progressive tradition: the way it develops, in concert with its fellows, through experience. This is a temporal, or better, historical semantic functionalism (and therefore, a kind of holism), in addition to the inferential semantic functionalism (and therefore holism), we have already considered. (My emphasis)63

(Actually Brandom’s position is closer to Hegel’s than this passage indicates because the passage elides two different things. There is the work we have cut out for us in a historical semantic functionalism; and there is the case we have to make that this is the work cut out for us about semantic change. The latter is not an episode in the former. Brandom’s Making It Explicit is not such an episode but a making explicit of what it is to attend to such episodes. Said another way, it is absolute knowledge.)

Second, in a sign of how far we have moved from Hegel in this account, Brandom wants to reject what he sees as Hegel’s too ambitious goal for a science of logic, the task Hegel assigns to reason, not to the understanding.

Specifically, I think that Hegel thinks that logical concepts are different from ground-level concepts in one important respect, and like them in another. They are unlike determinate empirical concepts in that Hegel thinks that there can, indeed must be a final, fully expressively adequate set of logical concepts, whose application in practice will never oblige their users to revise or relinquish them. He is a strong semantic optimist about logical concepts. Indeed, he thinks that in his Logic, he has presented such a system of logical concepts.64

This is what Brandom wants to reject in favor of something more moderate, given that empirical inquiry is not exhaustible on his account, and so the task of this retrospective exfoliation of “the process” is also never at an end. But however difficult it is to understand, Hegel clearly thinks that there is an autonomous philosophical task in “making explicit the process of making explicit,” to invoke Brandom’s own book, as noted above. The direction of dependence goes the other way, not the empiricist way suggested by Brandom when he says such things as,

For Hegel clearly takes it that the only way it is possible, in principle, to understand, specify, or convey logical or philosophical concepts is by rational reconstruction of an expressively progressive tradition of which they are the product.65 (My emphasis)

Moreover, the account given so far is incomplete. As stated, Brandom’s most useful notion, “sense dependence,” can look like some version of verificationism, or a dogmatic claim in a theory of meaning, or it is a kind of pragmatic dismissal of any such critical questions about the authority with which we claim such dependence. As I will discuss later, Hegel’s dissatisfaction with Kant and with his transcendental deduction does not mean that he dismisses all of Kant’s critical questions about such sense dependence. One can gain some sense of Hegel’s response to that question by entertaining the possibility of denying any such putative dependence—say, denying that a condition of the determinacy of any particular is our being able to distinguish essence and appearance—and seeing what happens. In effect, that is the “argument” of the logic of essence, and its failure, a kind of reductio, is what establishes this dependence.

Logic
But having looked at the “identity” claim and the understanding of “metaphysics,” we need also to understand at least a bit more of how Hegel understands the “logic” side of that claim in §24 of the EL that with him “now” logic is metaphysics. The question is what Hegel counts as the domain of what Frege called “the logical” (das Logische).66 As is obvious, Hegel’s Logic looks nothing like what we would recognize as a modern or symbolic or mathematical logic, and even nothing like a Begriffsschrift oriented from the internal requirements of such a Schrift.67 It involves no logical calculus, does not provide formation rules that stipulate a well-formed formula or inferences rules (rules for truth-preserving moves in a logical calculus), and is not even a reflection on the ontological (concepts, objects, relations) and even existential commitments (numbers) of logic understood this way (as in Frege, for example).68 There is the general similarity that both logic and metaphysics attempt to render transparent (“make explicit,” again in Brandomese) the basic structure of any “rendering intelligible,” but the SL doesn’t go much beyond that similarity in the notion of a logic. For whatever the connections are in the SL, they are clearly not truth-functional or deductive. As suggested, they have something to do with the demonstration of dependence relations necessary for successful conceptual determinacy.69 That is not an altogether clear project, but it has nothing to do with logical calculability, something ideally wholly algorithmic in the sense descended from Alonzo Church. To put the same point about calculability in a broader way, Hegel’s logic is not and cannot be reconstructed as symbolic (indifferent to content).70

This is all not because Hegel is wedded to the absoluteness of the standard term logic, at least not as it is usually understood. That is, his basic conception of logic is a term logic, but he has a different understanding of its elements than is traditional (as in the following sentence), and he thinks we have to work especially hard to understand how it might be used to assert the “speculative proposition.” The basic unit of rendering intelligible is predicative, but that does not mean that Hegel thinks of concepts as atomic, self-sufficient units of intelligibility, copulated “externally” in standard assertoric judgments.71 The very existence of the SL’s development manifests clearly that Hegel does not think concepts can be independent units of meaning. Hegel is thus (in his own quite distinctive way) as committed to the “context principle” as Frege, and it is part of the point of the whole enterprise, as the presence of reflective movement manifests, to demonstrate that concepts can be determinately specified only by their role in judgments, the determinacy of which depends on their roles as premises and conclusions in syllogisms, which themselves are related systematically.72 And he never tires of noting that the standard subject-predicate logical form is finally inadequate for the expression of “speculative truth.” We are not in a position to know yet what he does mean, positively, but he is not (or at the very least, does not regard himself as) trapped by standard scholastic assumptions unique to a term or judgmental logic.73

For another thing, for someone like Frege, logic is about possible truth-bearers, what he calls Gedanke, thoughts (the sentential Sinn or meaning of, paradigmatically, assertoric sentences, to be distinguished for him from judgments or beliefs, actually taking the thought to be true). As already indicated, Hegel (following Kant) is trying to account for any possible rendering intelligible, something that forces attention much more on the activity of “making sense” than on the internal constituents of a proposition, understood somewhat spatially.74 As noted before, Hegel certainly is a partisan of the traditional logic. The basic possibility of sense depends on an act, an act of rendering intelligible or judging. This is why he says that the true beginning of the Logic is the “resolve” to think anything at all, to do something, even if not at all in the sense of an action. This immediately raises the question of how a Hegelian ought to respond to what is widely known as “Frege’s point,” or the Frege-Geach point, that a proposition, the unit of intelligibility, may appear as asserted or not asserted and be recognizably the same proposition, and so that the question of assertoric force should be strictly separated from the intelligibility of the truth-bearers, but that question would take us far afield here.75

Kant, by contrast, divided all logic into what he called a “universal elementary logic” (allgemeine Elementarlogik) and a “specific use of the understanding” (besondere Verstandesgebrauch); what he called general or formal logic is a division of the former, and what he called transcendental logic, a “pure” or nonempirical subdivision of the latter.76 General logic is his version of the forms of valid inference: ultimately categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive syllogisms, and the judgment forms and conceptual components that comprise the basic elements of such forms. General logic is supposed to be strictly universal. There is no possible form of intelligible thought not of a judgmental form composed of such conceptual elements, capable of playing the role of premises or conclusions in such syllogisms. For Kant, this is because, in an innovation in his treatment already mentioned, general logic is said to have no content. That notion now requires some more discussion.

It doesn’t of course mean that the notions in a general logic are or could be treated as mere uninterpreted symbols. Kant’s logical pure concepts of the understanding are clearly determinate kinds of discrimination and affirmation (How much? Of what sort? Is so or is not so? Either so or not so? If such and such, then this or that).77 But their domain is completely unrestricted, not tied to any sort or range of objects. But this already complicates that relation between general logic and “the forms of thought considered with respect to any possible experiential object,” or transcendental logic, because it is part of Kant’s epistemology, not a theorem in his logic, that content can be provided only receptively, for finite knowers, and for us that means sensibly.78 Although he is relying on Aristotelian logic, this is not a distinction that would have occurred to Aristotle. The basic kinds of being there just show up in sortal predications, in the way “Socrates is a man,” “that is a stone,” sort substances, and “is white” and “is musical” designate quality, the qualitative modes of being. This may have been what Hegel meant by saying that the old metaphysics simply assumed that thoughts were the “essentialities” of things, as if these essentialities were themselves things or substantial entities.79

In the traditional reading of Kant,80 it would appear that Kant wants to introduce a step here, as if skeptical about why “our” ways of sorting things should have anything to do with “sortal realism” in the world. But this way of looking at Kant’s treatment of the relation between general and transcendental logic—which we are exploring as a possible perspective on that §24 identification—is implicated in a much broader set of interpretive claims that themselves raise problems of book-length dimensions.

The issue will be familiar to anyone familiar with a textbook Kant; call it the two-step picture. In this picture, there must “first” be sensible receptivity (according to “our” distinct, nonconceptual pure forms of intuition), and “then” there is conceptual articulation/synthesis, which is possible because of the imposition of categorical form. To some extent this requirement is a consequence of Kant’s view of judgment—that some component of the judgment must be a way of referring to objects—and another way of saying something about the object. But since, for Kant as well as for Frege, interpreted concepts determine extensions, this picture of separability and independent contributions to knowledge looks problematic. That is, if this idea of some possible independent contribution from sensibility is dubious, either as a reading of Kant or in itself (if the two sources of knowledge are notionally distinct, but inseparable in any concrete experience), then the general/transcendental logic distinction, which depends on this understanding of “contentless” versus “having content” or “being provided with content exogenously,” would have to be rethought as well.81

The denial of such a two-step picture, or the assertion of this inseparability, introduces a number of different issues. For one thing, Hegel’s claim about inseparability is not a prelude to any denial of the distinguishability of concept and intuition, and so to an argument for the wholly conceptual nature even of particulars or representations of particulars.82 For another, Hegel fully realizes the extreme difficulties in stating properly the dual claims of distinguishability and inseparability. In fact one could easily interpret all of Hegel after Glauben und Wissen, the early Jena work in which he first realized clearly what he called there the “organic” unity of concept and intuition, as various ways of addressing those difficulties. We can make analogies. We can say that pitch and timbre in a musical passage cannot be separated, as if one could be added to the other, even though they are different from one another. But these only go so far, and Hegel clearly wants a way of understanding the mutual dependence of each on the other that involves an “identity” even “within difference.” In other words, he came to see that the concept-intuition relation was at its heart a logical or conceptual problem, what he would variously call the problem of (how there could be such a thing as) “mediated immediacy,” or the inescapably reciprocal and correlated functions of identifying and differentiating.83 For another, in any apperceptive determination of content, any act of thinking, a relation to content has to be understood as a modality of a self-relation. (More on this in the next chapter.) The knower is related to itself in knowing an object or the relation to that object is not cognitive. But it also means that the sensible content, to focus on that example, is also to be understood in its determinacy as a modality of the self-relation. This gets quite complicated because such an apperceptive awareness in the case of perceptual experience itself and the distinct mode in which concepts are involved in the mere uptake of sensible content must be distinguished from apperceptive judging, in which a claim is made on the basis of perceptual experience. Neither Kant nor Hegel believes that experience itself consists in judgments.84

The qualification that this example of these logical relations is about features “in experience” is important. Hegel’s Logic obviously assumes that something like the basic logical grammar of thought as such (any thought of objects, any mode of rendering intelligible) is reflectively available as such. Since true judgments are also obviously intelligible, the form of any true judgment must embody the forms of intelligibility as such. The only temptation to think otherwise stems from imagining that these must be just the forms of our representings. And what about the representeds? And as we saw above in discussing McDowell, the Phenomenology of Spirit is supposed to have released us from the grip of such a supposed problem, revealed its presuppositions and therapeutically undermined them. This is why Hegel will say frequently, in explaining his differences with Kant, that the proper question is not whether certain predicates (categories) apply to objects, but whether the predicates are “something true in and of themselves” (EL §28R).

By the need to rethink the general/transcendental logic distinction, I mean the following. None of what we have seen about general logic amounts to a theory of what would be recognized today as a theory of logical truth or falsity. It is, in the sense already sketched for Hegel, a logic of general intelligibility. (Imperatives and aesthetic judgments must also conform to such forms.) Failing to observe the “norms of thinking” is not mistakenly thinking, making an error in thinking; it is not thinking at all, not making any sense. The prospect of objects “outside” something like the limits of the thinkable is a nonthought, a sinnlose Gedanke.85 But just because it is unthinkable, the strict distinction between a prior, content-free general logic and an a priori transcendental logic, the forms of possible thoughts about objects, can hardly be as hard and fast as Kant wants to make it out to be. Or, put another way, it is an artificial distinction; thought through carefully, according to Hegel, general logic must already be transcendental logic, at least in nuce. For one thing, as just noted, the distinction depends on a quite contestable strict separation between the spontaneity of thought (as providing formal unity) and the deliverances of sensibility in experience (as the sole “provider of content”).86 If that is not sustainable, and there is reason to think even Kant did not hold it to be a matter of strict separability, then the distinction between forms of thought and forms of the thought of objects cannot also be a matter of strict separability.87 To consider beings in their intelligibility (what Hegel called “the science of things in thought”) is not to consider them in terms of some species-specific subjective capacity, any more than considering truth-functional relations between sentences in a logic is a consideration of how we happen to go on with sentences.

To be is to be intelligible: the founding principle of Greek metaphysics and philosophy itself. (Entertaining the idea of an unintelligible being is not thinking of something strange and limiting; it is not thinking at all.) As with Aristotle, the guiding question is not what is it to be this or what is it to be that, but what is it to be something at all—what is “being something,” and so, what must knowing be, such that being can be known?88 Since to be intelligible means to be intelligibly knowable, the formula “to be is to be intelligible” is not, as it might sound, some sort of manifesto, as if willfully “banning” the unknowable from “the real.” It is rather to say that if there is knowledge at all, then knowledge is not such as to accept “restrictions.” Such a restricting would have to appeal to something like “our limited capacities,” and that relativization would infect all knowing.89 All knowing would be restricted to out finite capacities, and that is as much as saying that knowing would not be knowing. “What there is is what is knowable” is an implication of what knowing—all and any knowing—is if it is to be knowing. It is not a first-order claim about all being, as if it could prompt the question: How do we know that all of being is knowable? That is not a coherent question. There may be things we will never know, but that is not to say they are in principle unknowable. So those “two aspect” interpretations of Kant’s idealism and his doctrine of the unknowability of things in themselves, those claiming that knowing “for us” is restricted to “our epistemic conditions,” leaving it open for us to speculate about what might be knowable but transcends our powers of knowing, cannot be right. The position is internally incoherent. There is no “our” that can be put in front of “epistemic conditions.” They would not then be epistemic conditions; the account would not be philosophical but psychological. This is still true if we introduce so-called pure “subjective” forms of intuition, space and time. Either they are also epistemic conditions or they are not. If they are restrictions, then nothing in the transcendental analytic that depends on them (that is, everything) can be an epistemic condition.90 Understood properly, such a claim about noumenal ignorance could only mean: we can know only what is available, made manifest, to know. To say we do not know things in themselves is to say we cannot know what we cannot know—either a harmless truism or incoherent. (There is nothing that could be known that is in principle unknowable, the first law of philosophical atheism; that is the first law of philosophy.)91

In just this sense, if we pose a challenge to this principle from the standpoint of the Critique of the Power of Judgment, and ask how we can know a priori about nature’s suitability for our cognitive ends, and so its purposiveness, we have again imported a kind of neo-Kantian version of Kant and assumed that our forms of cognition are only or merely ours, and so restricted our results to something like “insofar as we could render this intelligible,” which is as good as saying we do not know what we are talking about.

Yet more care must be exercised here, lest readers get the wrong idea. To say that the forms of “thought” are, must be, the form of objects of thought does not mean that any form of “mere thinking” delineates some ontological realm—as if the forms of the thought of astrological influence are the forms of such influence in the world. We mean first to refer to the forms without which thinking would not be thinking at all, or general logic. In philosophical terms, we have been talking of forms of judgment, possible knowledge of objects. It would never occur to us, I assume, to entertain the thought that the form of some piece of empirical knowledge is not the form of the object of knowledge. That would be like entertaining the thought that the form of knowledge is not a form of knowledge. The philosophical topic for Kant is the form of possible knowledge. For Hegel, Kant’s “clue” about this is a truism; the logical functions of the understanding in judgment cannot but be the pure concepts of the understanding, the forms of possible knowledge (and thereby the forms of the objects of knowledge). Kant believed that since this left open the possibility that there might be objects given to thought that might not conform to the pure concepts, a deduction was needed, and for that, a use of the pure forms of intuition was necessary. Hegel’s account trades instead on a demonstration of the necessity that a putative form is actually a form of possible knowledge. If it can be shown that some putative form is, necessarily, a form of any case of knowledge, the possibility Kant worried about is already foreclosed. Entertaining that possibility is like entertaining the possibility that empirical knowledge is not knowledge, that the form of such knowledge is not the form of objects of knowledge.

Now, this raises an obvious, huge problem. It all places enormous pressure on what amounts to a kind of operator in Hegel’s Logic on which all the crucial transitions depend, something like: “would not be fully intelligible, would not be coherently thinkable without . . .” What follows the “without” is some more comprehensive concept, a different distinction, and so forth. Excluding logical contradictions would be one obvious instantiation of the operator. But—and the whole possibility of Hegel’s logical enterprise depends on this point—the range of the logically possible is obviously far more extensive than the range of what Kant called the “really possible.” The latter is what we need if we are to have a logic of the real. (Uncaused events are logically possible, but not really possible, something we know a priori.) And Hegel cannot avail himself of Kant’s nonconceptual forms of intuition to establish a priori the sensible conditions that set the boundaries of “the really possible.” As Kant conceived his project, it would make no sense to attempt to prove objective validity for synthetic a priori truths if such an appeal were not possible.

Transcendental logic, on the contrary, has a manifold of sensibility that lies before it a priori, which the transcendental aesthetic has offered to it, in order to provide the pure concepts of the understanding with a matter [einen Stoff], without which they would be without any content [ohne allen Inhalt], thus completely empty [völlig leer] . . . Only the spontaneity of our thought requires that this manifold first be gone through, taken up, and combined in a certain way in order for a cognition to be made out of it. I call this action synthesis. (CPR A77/B102)92

However, to pick a strange ally at this point, Peter Strawson demonstrated, in The Bounds of Sense, that the really possible can be determined without what he considered Kant’s subjective idealism (the subjective forms of intuition), and this—revealingly for our purposes—by a reflection on whether a candidate notion of experience could be said to make sense. Moreover, the key issue in Hegel’s account is not logical contradiction and logical possibility, but the possibility of the intelligible determinacy of nonempirical conceptual content, the categories without which there could not be intelligible (i.e., determinable) objects. Strawson would also point out that Kant already seems to assume that he is showing how the minimal intelligibility of judgment could not be possible without the twelve moments of the table of pure concepts. That is already a kind of determination of the really possible. Kant, however, does not provide the arguments for such a deduction.

Moreover, the following sort of formulation in Kant is one of those that directly counter what Hegel believes to be the unfortunate general tendency in the Critique to consider concepts as subjective classifications that we apply to exogenously received content, requiring that we wonder whether they “fit” in individual cases and whether the nonderived classifications of conceptual powers have anything to do with, can rightly be “imposed on,” such content.93 (I do not mean that this impositionism is Kant’s view; I mean that Hegel, in his critical moments, fastens onto passages that could suggest that [as have generations of commentators] and does not think through passages like the following.) Here, in this formulation, there is no content except as constituted by the logical form of judgment, and so no strict separation between general and transcendental logic.

The same function that gives unity to various representations in a judgment also gives unity to the mere [bloße] synthesis of representations in an intuition, which, expressed generally, is called the pure concept of the understanding. The same understanding, therefore, and indeed by the very same actions through which it brings the logical form of a judgment into concepts by means of the analytic unity, also brings a transcendental content [einen transzendentalen Inhalt] into its representation by means of the synthetic unity of the manifold in general. On account of which they are called pure concepts of the understanding that pertain to objects a priori; this can never be accomplished by universal logic. (CPR A79/B105)94

It is not easy to know what Kant means by “brings a transcendental content into its representation by means of the synthetic unity of the manifold in general,” but in the broadest sense, what Kant says is certainly true. Universal or general logic cannot determine which predicates belong with which subjects, which events are necessarily succeeded by which events. We cannot determine what are real, concrete “synthetic unities” merely by thinking of some. But if we take “the same function” seriously, then the specifications of the logical forms of unity in a judgment just thereby specify what Kant is calling here, somewhat mysteriously, “transcendental content.” The passage brings us very close to formulations frequent in the Logic: that the concept gives itself its own actuality. The “same function” passage could even be read as a gloss on that claim.95

This would not of course mean that we could not still broadly mark out a formal logic in the sense of, say, forms of valid logical inference, which, when instantiated by variables, will yield valid results.96 It is just to say that the link between such inferential and conceptual forms and forms of the thought of objects is a close and a priori one. (Kant is interested in this connection but limits himself to the parallelism between the tables of the logical functions of judgment and the table of categories. To reiterate the point made earlier: the very fact that there is such a parallelism—why should there be?—is already an indication of a deeper connection.) That deeper connection means that such forms are, at the same time, possible forms of well-formed judgments and proper inferences and forms of the thought of objects, of objects considered in their intelligibility. These latter constitute all that objects could be, are the forms of objects, and without Kant’s “only for us” restriction, because without his reliance on nonconceptual forms of sensibility to establish that claim.

Kant seems to think that he is faced with two exclusive alternatives. Either concepts, qua concepts, have objects, or their objects are provided exogenously. The former is the case only for logical content; the latter is necessary if we are trying understand any power of knowledge. Hegel is providing a third alternative: that a strict separability between concept and intuitively apprehended object is impossible, even though the notions are distinguishable. To establish the conceptually necessary is to establish the really possible, if we have understood the establishing of conceptual necessity properly, differently than Kant. The forms of the thought of an object can be considered the forms of objects (in Kantian language the forms of sensibility) if it can be shown that the thought of anything at all, any way of making sense, would fail without some form or other. And so Kant’s appeal to the form of the extraconceptual as if to a distinct contributor is misleading and unnecessary.

Hegel agrees with this remark by Kant, in other words, just disagreeing that Kant must then go on to prove that there must be such manifolds.

The pure categories, however, are nothing other than presentations of things insofar as the manifold of their intuition must be thought through one or another of these logical functions. (CPR A245/B303)

Kant of course wants that reference to the “manifold of intuition” to be doing some necessary, extra–general logic work, especially in the transcendental deduction of the second edition. For example, when we realize that such a manifold has a pure, nonconceptual form, time, we have a way of showing how categories provided by the understanding from itself could be the forms of objects that exist independent of thought. By being modes of time-consciousness, they are thereby the forms of any intuitable content and can be considered extraconceptually as a way of getting into view all possible sensible content. But for Hegel this specification of content by thinking of the temporal modality of its forms must be a further specification by thought of its own activity.97 Otherwise the question of the relation of forms of thought to objects turns out to have a quasi-empirical answer. The answer would have to be: the forms of thought relate to objects “for creatures built like us.”98 More broadly, we can say that Mary Tiles is right that “categories are the concepts which frame objects in this way.” For me this means categories alone. They do this already, as forms, without reliance on extraconceptual forms of sensibility.99

By contrast, Kant’s view, again, seems to be that, first, all thinkings, all representations, have intensional content (are simply about something), so it is possible to consider pure thinkings in terms not just of intensional content (as subjects of which predicates may be predicated) but also of real or objective content (substances and properties).100 We can thus formulate possible candidates for “categories.” For Hegel we are thereby already in the heart of speculative philosophy. But since we are for Kant dependent in experience on nonconceptual forms of intuition, these must be merely putative categories. We cannot know without further ado that or how such “transcendental content” bears on content so enformed. (Because of the independent status of pure forms of intuition, there is supposed to be no guarantee that sensible objects can be possible objects of the understanding, whatever the understanding’s “own” content is.) The “further ado” (in this traditional way of reading Kant) is the transcendental deduction, after which we supposedly know that in our experience there are, must be, substances in the sense of that which is permanent through time and alterations, underlying such change, in which properties inhere. This, supposedly, proves that transcendental content is not merely intensional, that objects sensibly apprehended correspond to it. But again, if Kant’s own indications that there cannot be any strict separability between concept and intuition hold, the strategy is misconceived. This is, I believe, Hegel’s claim, and partly explains why the SL looks the way it does.101 Kant thinks: we cannot know that there is anything that instantiates what the pure categories determine—substances, say. We need the Deduction to establish that there is, since the forms of thought cannot but determine what could be an object (not, as he is sometimes taken to mean, what “can be made into an object by us”). If we take Kant’s question to be simply how do we know there are objects at all, then that is not a question either Kant or Hegel is interested in. It is a question that depends on assumptions they would both reject. (It is like assuming that trying to determine the possible objects of thought by thought insures that we will end up only with objects-as-thought, not objects as they are. Hegel makes clear in many places what he thinks of this willful suicide by thought.)102

That is, when Hegel tries to explain what, by contrast, he means by “introducing content” into “logic,” he makes clear he is not talking about the great multitude of empirical content, the intuited manifold, or just about thought-content in the sense of logical content, like subject-predicate. He says something that will require much clarification later.

By thus introducing content into logical consideration, it is not the things, but what is rather the fact [Sache], the concept of the things, that becomes the subject matter. (SL 21.17)

“Fact” doesn’t help much as a translation; he doesn’t seem to mean anything like Tatsache, or what is the case. He is moving in the opposite direction from anything empirical, anything having to do with things or facts about existence. He becomes a little clearer when he says about the concept of such a content,

This concept is not intuited by the senses, is not represented in imagination; it is only subject matter [Gegenstand], the product and content of thought, the fact that exists in and for itself [die an und für sich seyende Sache], the logos, the reason of that which is, the truth of what we call things; it is least of all the logos that should be kept outside the science of logic. (21.17)103

This “reason of that which is” means that Hegel cannot be talking about logical content (like “subject term,” “disjunct,” or “antecedent”), and that is stressed in other ways throughout the SL and in the EL.

When thinking is taken as active with regard to objects as the thinking over [Nachdenken] of something, then the universal—as the product of this activity—contains the value of the matter [Wert der Sache], what is essential [das Wesentliche], inner, true. (EL §21)

Throughout passages like this, Hegel is distinguishing the question of actuality, the proper subject matter of the Logic, from questions about existence, and we will see that distinction at work often. In the EL §6, he defines the content of philosophy proper as “actuality” and distinguishes it from the merely apparent, transient, and insignificant. (The immediate temptation to think of this as a two-world theory is a powerful one. Resisting it requires remembering the enormous importance of Aristotle for Hegel and Aristotle’s rejection of Plato’s two-world metaphysics.) In the Philosophy of Right, he begins with a reminder he repeats often, that such a study consists neither in the mere analysis of the concept of right, nor in an empirical account of existing institutions, but in an account of the concept together with its actuality, where the latter is distinguished from “external contingency, untruth, deception, etc.” (PR §1).

It is the kind of issue that arises when we ask if some practice is “really” or “actually” religious—peyote smoking, say. We don’t doubt that the practice exists; we want to know its “essentiality,” Wert, Sache an sich selbst, and so forth.104 We don’t doubt that animals exist; we want to know if they are actually rights bearers. We know computers can play chess and win, perhaps one day could even pass Turing tests, but we want to know not whether these facts are true, but whether the computer is “actually” thinking. In a more familiar, recent example, a gallery opens, and objects, pieces of clothing, say, are exhibited strewn about the floor. It is called art, but we want to know, is it actually art? Or we could ask, what actually is an object of experience? And we might answer, “that in the concept of which the manifold is united.” As Quine pointed out, the answer to the question “What is there?” is easy: everything. But not everything is actual.105

Hegel’s impatience with those who think that his project aims to demonstrate that everything that exists, everything contingent, is really necessary boils over in §6 of the introduction to the Encyclopedia. He refers to his famous “Doppelsatz” in the preface to the Philosophy of Right (that what is rational is actual and what is actual is rational), and he notes explicitly that what exists certainly exists contingently and “can just as well not be,” and he refers us to the Logic for the right explication of what is “actual” by contrast with what merely exists. He adds, “Who is not smart enough to be able to see around him quite a lot that is not, in fact, how it ought to be?” (We can come to understand what a state actually is, though no such state exists.) Yet despite Hegel’s waving this huge bright flag inscribed, “I believe in contingency!” one still hears often (even from scholars of German philosophy) that his philosophy is an attempt to deduce the necessity of everything from the Prussian state to Krug’s fountain pen.106

With right qualifications in place, what Hegel means by actuality and all its synonyms (which will crucially include “essence,” to be discussed in chapter 6) is congruent with what Kant meant by categoriality. Consider this claim from the Phenomenology:

The category which otherwise signified the essentiality of what exists where it was indeterminate if “what exists” signified the essentiality of what exists per se or signified what exists as confronting consciousness, is now the essentiality, that is, the simple unity of what exists merely as a thinking actuality. Or, to put it differently, the category is this: Self-consciousness and being are the same essence, that is, the same not in comparison with each other, but rather the same in and for itself. (PhG §235)

Seeing it this way helps explain his otherwise bewildering claim that the concept (in this sense) gives itself its own actuality. This has nothing to do with some Neoplatonic self-causing process, out of which concepts pop, like toast from a toaster. The claim means: the sort of questions posed above are in no sense empirical questions, answerable by some fact of the matter. If that is so, there is no reason we cannot speak Hegelese, and say that thought determines for itself what is actual, gives itself its own actuality. How then to account for the determinate actualities treated in the Logic? In answering this Hegel seems to place a lot of faith in some sort of derivability of such essentialities from the conditions for the possibility of discursive intelligibility as such.107 The paradigmatic form of such sense-making is predicative: paradigmatically (but only paradigmatically, not exclusively), assertoric categorical judgments. We shall see how and why his attempt differs a great deal from Kant’s similar one in the Metaphysical Deduction, but the point now is the similarity. The Concept gives itself its own actuality. The answers to any type of question like those posed above are not empirical. Empirical questions depend on, would not be possible without, the determination of the intelligibly actual. (Later we will see Hegel trace out the answer to the question of actuality by considering the most influential one, Aristotle’s. What gives actuality is form, the logos of essence. So understood, actuality, Wirklichkeit, is Aristotle’s energeia. As Hegel says in his History of Philosophy lectures, “actuality means being at work [Am Werke Sein], activity [Tätigkeit].”)108

It is true that all of this can seem a radical departure from Kant, for whom concepts stand in no immediate relation to objects, are in that relation only as mediated by other representations. But this is true only superficially. The concept of any object at all, for example, is not a concept of a content that could be given to us, any more than the concept of nature could be. Yet reason provides a content to that concept of nature (possible objects of sensory experience), which content it has only by being thought to have such a content. How pure thinking could be said to provide an ever more determinate content for the concept of any possible object is something we will see Hegel addressing in chapter 5.109

To note this though about what it might mean to say that a concept “gives itself” its own actuality touches on a larger, similar problem that will emerge in several different ways in what follows. I have said that Hegel agrees with Kant that thinking is basically discursive. But that has to be immediately qualified. Understood as Kant does, it means that thought can give itself no content, only think about content “supplied” extraconceptually. Thinking is not, in this tradition, a receptive power. Kant reasoned that the only available sort of extraconceptual receptivity known to us is sensible; hence the fundamentality of the concept–(sensible) intuition divide. If that is the inference, then “the discursivity of thought thesis” immediately prohibits anything anywhere near the neighborhood of a “concept gives itself its own actuality” thesis, where actuality means something like the categorical essence of things, that without which they couldn’t be what they are, and not the logically actual in Kant’s sense. Such a prohibition is the whole point of the discursivity claim. (This would not exhaust all the alternatives if by thinking, thought could produce, in the sense of create, its own objects—if there were “intellectual intuition,” something Kant reserves only for God. It is thus understandable that for some commentators when Hegel speaks of concepts giving themselves their own actuality, he must be referring to Absolute Spirit’s self-realization.)

But for Hegel, while this seems to be as great a difference as imaginable, it is not. Kant had already himself indicated that discursive thought must have an “intuitive moment” in itself in being able to lay out the elements of the Metaphysical Deduction.110 Thought must be able to determine its own moments or form, not conceptualize an alien content. There can be no great tension in the two claims, because Kant is quite interested in what he says our “cognitive faculty . . . provides out of itself” (CPR B1). According to Hegel, Kant did not have a handle on his own thinking and seemed to pick up the categories from logic textbooks, but the fact that the concept of judgment itself could, at least putatively, “determine itself” in these moments already gives Hegel his stalking horse. This moment is not anything like “seeing” thought’s nature as an object; it is spontaneous. Kant is very clear that “Reason has insight only into that which it produces after a plan of its own,” and the results in the Critique of Pure Reason are “produced” by reason itself. But neither is this activity the discursive application of a predicate to a concept of an object. What we know is what we know in exercising reason, what we know in judging. It is also the case that Kant himself had already showed, made the “logical point” in his account of space and time as both forms of intuition and pure intuitions, that a form could be a form of apprehension and itself a content at the same time. In the addition to EL §41, Hegel remarks that Kant himself, in formulating reason’s critique of itself, treats forms of cognition as objects of cognition, thus being committed to the unity of “the activity of the forms of thinking” and “the critique of them.” He calls this feat “dialectic.” Mathematical construction in mathematical proof makes essentially the same point, although the points about pure intuition are only analogues of the general point Hegel would want to make and are not invoked as such in the Logic. And most suggestively for the entire enterprise of the Logic, practical reason can determine the form of a rational will that is also itself a substantive content. The self-legislation of the moral law is not volitional anarchy but practical reason’s knowledge of “what” to legislate. It “legislates” in being practical reason reasoning about what ought to be done. It legislates because in knowing what ought to be done it is not affected by some object, “what is to be done,” about which it judges. It determines, produces, what is to be done.111 Said more simply, when one makes a promise, one legislates into existence a promise. One is bound only by binding oneself. This does not mean that we also legislate what it is to be bound, but that too is a self-determination of reason, a formulation by reason of itself, not the discovery or grasp of a content. Being bound is the concept of being bound, applied to oneself. (While it is true that the self-legislation of the moral law can serve as a fine example of what it is for a concept to give itself its own content, as it did for Fichte—practical reason determines the content of practical reason as itself, as the form of practical reason—Kant also holds that while we must acknowledge this, must concede its necessity, we have no way of understanding how practical reason determines, realizes, what is to be done.112 This is a form of thought—“must acknowledge but do not finally understand”—that often occasions Hegel’s impatience.)

For another thing, the methodology of the SL itself must be respected. Thought’s self-determination in the course of the book makes no reference to the Absolute’s self-consciousness in order to explain anything. As we shall see in the next chapter, and when we look at the opening moves of the SL, the “intuitive” moment in discursive thought is tied up with Hegel’s interpretation of the apperceptive character of discursive thought. The simplest summary would be that Hegel thinks of such self-consciousness as inherently self-transcending as well, or as implying a kind of possible achievement of full or absolute reflection.113 Any thinking of a content is inherently reflexive in a way that Hegel thinks will allow him to derive from the possible thought of anything at all notions like something and finitude, and ultimately essence, appearance, even the idea of the good. (So, contra Kant on what we might call thought’s absolute discursivity, Hegel thinks that thought is always already giving itself its own content: itself, where that means, roughly, determining that without which it could not be a thought of an object, something that is itself “identical” to the determination of any intelligible, any object.) But all this can count now only as previews of coming attractions.

Finally, the question of whether Hegel thereby means to say that, contra Hume, for example, a world in which there are no necessary connections between events is logically impossible is impossible to answer in that form. We could say: if we entertain an abstraction, in which we consider the thinkable as such, independent of any relation to objects, and if we consider any particular possibility as an isolated one, in itself, we could say, in that sense such a world would be logically possible. But Hegel would deny that this is a philosophically significant result. Thinking is by its nature object-related, and the logical possibility of any one potentiality depends for its determinability on entertaining a great many other presuppositions and implications, and when viewed in that way, in that sense of logic, the answer is no, such a world is not possible. (Hegel’s appeal to the totality of these presuppositions, implications, exclusions in this sense functions like Kant’s appeal to the possibility that experience can “control” what Kant would call “real possibilities.”) Hegel does not get this claim for free, of course, but it is what he is trying to show.

The suggestion is that Hegel thinks of anything’s principle of intelligibility, its conceptual form, as an actualization in the Aristotelian sense, the being-at-work or energeia of the thing’s distinct mode of being, not a separable immaterial metaphysical object. In understanding Hegel on this point, we should take fully on board the form-matter, actuality-potentiality language of Aristotle, and so the most interesting kind of hylomorphism, soul-body hylomorphism, as our way of understanding this nonseparateness claim. In the standard analogy (from Aristotle’s De Anima), if the eye were body (matter), seeing, the power of sight, would be its soul (form), the distinct way of the being-at-work or first actuality of its body. There is thus no true separability (even if distinguishability); a “dead” eye is not an eye anymore, except homonymously.

So in a human sensibly receptive creature, to appeal to that example, subject to sensory impressions, specific conceptual intuitings (this-suches) would be the distinctive actuality, the distinctive being-at-work of such a capacity. To think that for creatures like us, we must distinguish the sensory manifold from the form that informs it is the great temptation to be avoided for Hegel. The power of the eye to see is not a power “added” to a material eye, as if there could be an eye identical in all respects to a normal eye but unable to see, that was then “infused” with the seeing power. The seeing power is the distinct being-at-work of that body. The form-content model central to Hegel’s account of logical formality works the same way.114

And “in us” as well, it is the actualization of a conceptual power, an actualization that is not in the nonspeculative sense identical with, the same as, the being-at-work in the thing (the thing is not trying to make itself intelligible) but that is, in the right understanding of that being-at-work, its actualization in thought, that is actualized in being and that is the principle of its intelligibility. This can be understood in the same way that, according to Aristotle, in sense perception there can be a single “actualization” of two distinct potentialities, in the perceptible and in the perceiver.115 Or, with the proper qualifications, it can be expressed as Kant would about categories: that, for example, causality refers as much to a way of understanding as to a feature of any possibly intelligible world. So it is perfectly appropriate to say such things as that for Hegel reality “has a conceptual structure” or “only concepts are truly real,” as long as we realize we are talking not about entities, much less separable, immaterial abstract entities, but about the “actualities” of beings, their modes or ways of being what determinately and intelligibly they are. To say that “any object is the concept of itself” is to say that what it is in being at work being what it is can be determined, has a logos, and this is the other side of the coin “every judging is the consciousness of itself as judging,” as will be explored in the next chapter. We can say that reality comes to self-consciousness about itself in us, or that the light that illuminates beings in their distinct being-at-work is the same light that illuminates their knowability in us, as long as we do not mean a light emanating from individual minds.116

And here again, Hegel’s model of metaphysics, as is indicated by his frequent invocation of the German term for energeia, Wirklichkeit, is Aristotelian. And Aristotle’s metaphysics is not modern dogmatic metaphysics, does not concern a “supersensible” reality knowable only by pure reason. In many respects it is a metaphysics of the ordinary: standard sensible objects, especially organic living beings and artifacts. This means that in many respects Kant’s critique of rationalist metaphysics in effect “misses” it, or intersects with it only marginally. Aristotle, for the most part, is interested not in the special, nonsensible objects that Kant (or Plato) was concerned with,117 but in the intelligibility conditions of ordinary objects. To say this is not to say that he is interested just in epistemology or the priority of epistemology. It is to say, as Hegel would, that he is interested not simply in how we make sense of things, but in how things are such that they can be made sense of, and why the questions could not be separated. Hegel’s project, I am trying to suggest, has much more to do with this enterprise than with either a Neoplatonist theory of reality or an attempt to determine the furniture of the universe available only to pure reason, like a monistic substance or monads or ideas.

He has his problems with Aristotle. He would not say that the mind can in some way “become all things,” or he has difficulties with any sort of passive intellectual intuition, but the similarities are much more important.118 And in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy, Hegel “Hegelianizes” Aristotle to minimize these differences. When he is explaining the Aristotelian notion of form (eidos) as actuality (energeia, Wirklichkeit), he says about this actualizing activity that

this principle of liveliness [Lebendigkeit], of subjectivity—not in the sense of a contingent, only particular subjectivity, but of pure subjectivity—is essentially Aristotle’s position. (JA 18, 319–20)119

We also have to note again locutions like “the product of thought,” and “the product of this activity” with reference to the concept. Concepts cannot be said to be simply apprehended in themselves, to possess content that is simply grasped. He says that all development in the Phenomenology and Logic “rests exclusively on the nature of the pure essentialities that constitute the content of the logic” (SL 21.8).

In EL §20, Hegel again discusses this Produkt language and says that the subject matter of the Logic will be thinking (Denken), understood as an activity (Tätigkeit), which means that thinking is the “active universal” (das tätige Allgemeine) or the “self-activating” (sich betätigende) universal, because the deed (Tat) or that brought about (Hervorgebrachte) is the universal (das Allgemeine). He then goes on at length to distinguish this understanding from a psychological notion of thinking as a mental activity.

These formulations can be fully understood only in the terms of the logic of the Concept, but they also introduce us to elements of Hegel’s idealism that should be kept in mind. That is, as is often pointed out by those who object to an interpretation of Hegel as what has come to be called, after Klaus Hartmann,120 a category theorist, Hegel’s aim in the Logic is truth, understood in the so-called “ontological sense.”121 His interest is in what really is, what there is “in truth,” what “wahrhaftes Sein” is, not what we are committed to in understanding the finite empirical world. And, according to Hegel, what there is in truth, that is, what “the Absolute” is, is the Idea, understood as the unity of concept and reality, or true actuality (Wirklichkeit). Finite existent objects do not count as what there is in truth because they do not fully correspond with their concept. For one thing, we tend to identify such finite objects with their “seemings,” their immediately givenness to common sense. But we need an “essence-seeming” distinction to understand what is “in actuality.” (This is essentially what we are to conclude from the transition from a logic of being to a logic of essence.) Or, for another, to use Hegel’s own example, a “bad” house is not adequate to its concept, but it also is, or it would not be a house. It is in this sense, that it is both identical with itself, is what it is, and not identical with itself, is not what it is, that it exists in a kind of contradiction.122 This is why Hegel says, in the second addition to EL §24, that speculative truth is not the agreement of a judgment with some matter of fact, but the agreement of the concept with itself, and he cites as examples a true friend or a true work of art.

Moreover, as we shall see in the logic of essence, while it is true that one of Hegel’s grandest divisions is between positivism, a faith in the ultimate reality of the finite, and idealism, the contrary view, we have to be careful about the category of the finite.123 By and large Hegel means to “denigrate” the immediately given, how things seem to common sense, Schein, or in general the finite. This has nothing to do with doubting the external reality of tables and molecules, any more than Marx’s claim that what seems earned wealth in capitalist society is really human labor means to deny that some people are wealthy.124 And this suggestion that true reality resides in anything’s concept, that ultimate reality, the really real, consists in the reality of concepts in the Idea, or the concept of concepts, seems to indicate that we have in Hegel a recognizable “degrees of reality” Platonism. This impression is heightened in light of the fact that each finite concept, by virtue of being finite, does not perfectly express even its own concept (a particular horse is not “what horseness is”), much less conceptuality itself (full intelligibility, or what Hegel calls “absolute reflection”).125 Or, what Hegel means by reality at some “lower level” is the manifestation of some defective intelligibility.

A traditional degrees-of-reality realism like this would leave unaccounted for all the references to subjectivity, the active universal, deeds, and that brought about (hervorgebrachte). Concepts are supposed to be moments in the process of thought’s attempt to determine its own possibility (the possibility of thinking what is the case and so the forms of possible being), not apprehended realities, eidetic things. The point of Hegel’s denying to finite, empirical reality the gold standard badge of true actuality is not to say that it “possesses” a lesser degree of reality in the traditional sense (whatever that might mean). It is to say that finite objects viewed in their finitude, or considered as logical atoms, can never reveal the possibility of their own intelligibility. (The implication of this: the fullest, indeed, the absolute realization of being is the intelligibility of intelligibility itself, the concept of the concept.) An empirical attention to the finite details will provide us only with lists of properties, successions of events, mere associations, nothing that would get us close to the basis of the possibility even of identifying those determinate properties and events. For that we need to understand such finite objects in the light of the concepts required for their intelligible apprehension and explanation, and we will never achieve that by empirical observation or, given Hegel’s attack on immediacy in all its forms, by any intellectual intuition either. This process of thought’s determination of its own possibility may still be—is—pretty vague, and the isolation and identification of the necessary moments of such self-determination will place a great deal of stress on that notion of necessity (and so on the process of internal self-negation by which they are identified), but those problems amount to the task Hegel’s approach gives us. And this sort of interpretation allows one to see one sense in which it is close to Kant on the a priori specification of content exclusively by “thought,” but without distinct, separable forms of receptivity, and without any appeal to an intuitive intellect “creating” everything it thinks by thinking, and without claiming anything about the “necessary passing-over of being-in-itself (substance) to being-for-itself (subject),”126 and that is all we need for now. What these “essentialities” (Wesenheiten) are will obviously be a crucial question, but the earlier list of logical categories will give some idea.127

As we shall see, this approach to Hegel’s SL will make it possible to see Hegel not as relying on an appeal to a pure manifold of sense, on the assumption of separable forms of intuition, but rather as beginning to interrogate the problem of possible determinacy of content by beginning with the mere possibility of the thought of anything at all: the thought, Being. But in keeping with the assumption that the primary unity of intelligibility is judgment, the act of asserting, Hegel does not mean that we entertain the concept as if grasping a content. The thinking of being requires what any thinking requires, an act of determination. But to see why that is so we need to understand another crucial orienting issue: the self-conscious or apperceptive nature of judging.