7
# THE LIVES OF CONCEPTS
The Living Concept
Our focus throughout has been on the single question: what does Hegel mean when he says that, as he understands it, logic, his Science of Logic, is metaphysics? An immediate subsidiary question is why he says that it is only “now” that logic can be rightly understood as metaphysics, and not as the object- or thing-oriented metaphysics of the Platonic and modern rationalist tradition. Keeping that focus, our interest in the logic of the Concept will have two dimensions in these two chapters. We might call them two aspects of the “metaphysics of life.” We need first a brief summary of where we are in the Logic as we begin the logic of the Concept.

I understand the transition to the subjective logic in the following way. The objective logic has established that the truth of objects is the Concept. The distinct way in which an object is what it is, and so its determinate intelligibility, is its concept, as the necessary moments or Denkbestimmungen of such concepts have been determined. The Science of Logic is a theory of pure thinking, and in that context, we seek the pure concepts, thinking’s a priori determination of its own norms, without which no object could be determined to be what it is. This is Hegel’s account of first philosophy. First philosophy does not exhaust philosophy. First philosophy distinguishes the question “What is it?” from its question, “What is it to say what something is?” and tries to answer the latter. The former question can be empirical (“What is electricity?”), but it need not be, and can be a philosophical question (“What is Geist?”). How to pose and pursue the latter sort of questions is a topic unto itself. We are concerned with the first philosophical question. In the realm of finite objects, any specification of determinate intelligibility, even if relatively successful, is still limited, or in Kant’s sense “conditioned”; in Hegel’s sense, if considered as absolute or satisfactory, “contradictory.” Since any such rendering intelligible must be self-conscious to be such a judging, such conditionedness and limitation are inseparable from determinate intelligibility itself, and so can be said to “demand” completion in an unconditioned. (Much more on this dynamic in this chapter.) With this established, however, we seek a higher degree of intelligibility (one not subject to such limitations), indeed the highest. And so the concept itself, or conceptuality itself, the truth of finite objectivity, is now our object. In this sense, pure thinking’s determination of itself, not just qua the truth of objects, but qua itself as its own object, represents, ultimately, Hegel’s unconditioned—pure and absolute self-conscious intelligibility, the intelligibility of intelligibility itself, the Absolute.

Now in the next chapter, we will want to understand why such a metalogical or metaconceptual inquiry has the structure it does: “Subjectivity,” “Objectivity,” and “The Idea.” The basic idea will be that, having investigated possible objects of knowledge, what it is truly to be any such object, in terms of their “truth,” their concept (that is, in terms of the basic identity at the heart of the Logic—the identity of the forms of thought and the forms of being, the identity of logic and metaphysics), we will now investigate the concept, or conceptuality, in its being the truth of objectivity.

Thus the concept is the truth of substance, and since necessity is the determining relational mode of substance, freedom reveals itself to be the truth of necessity and the relational mode of the concept.1 (12.12)

And,

The concept is now this absolute unity of being and reflection whereby being-in-and-for-itself only is by being equally reflection or positedness [Gesetztseyn] and positedness only is by being in-and-for-itself. (Ibid.)

Two sides of the same coin again, but now from a different point of view, the point of view of conceptuality, in its having been shown to be the truth of being. It is in understanding what we have done, in one last turn of self-conscious thought, that we have reached the comprehensive point of view of the Idea, understood as the dual idea of cognition (the idea of the true and the idea of the good), and as thereby understood, the absolute idea.

Hegel himself notes that one way of thinking of the subject matter of the subjective logic is that it provides us with the “concept of the concept” (12.16), and he goes on to note the many Kantian affinities with his project. The concept of the concept, or conceptuality, or conceiving as the truth of being, is the “‘I’ or pure self-consciousness” (12.17), and he notes Kant’s own version of the truth of any object: Kant defined the object as “the concept in which the manifold is united” at CPR B137. Being as such a “positedness,” which is nevertheless being-in-and-for-itself, means that the objectivity of any concept “is none other than the nature of self-consciousness, has no other moments of determinations than the ‘I’ itself” (12.18).2

The important issue in the logic of the Concept that I would like to focus on in this part has two different dimensions. This issue is the claim that the concept of life should be understood as a topic in a speculative logic, a theory of pure thinking. This seems implausible. It is a contingent fact that there are living beings, and we intuitively think that whatever differences there are between living and nonliving beings should be empirically discoverable. The second dimension, the topic in this chapter, concerns the entire Logic. We are in the right position now—that is, retrospectively—to understand the frequent metaphor Hegel invokes to characterize his own contribution to a philosophical reflection on logic. This is the claim that speculative concepts are, in their relation to each other, “alive” or interanimating. For example,

Were the logical forms of the concept actually dead, ineffective, and indifferent receptacles of representations or thoughts, then familiarity with them would be a historical record that is quite superfluous and dispensable for the truth. In fact, however, as forms of the concept, they are, to the contrary, the living spirit of the actual, and what is true of the actual is true only by virtue of these forms, through them, and in them. However, the truth of these forms for themselves, let alone their necessary connection, has never been considered and investigated until now. (EL §162)

There is, in other words, the pure concept life, and there is conceptual life, the lives of concepts. Life in general is treated elsewhere, of course, in his Philosophy of Nature and his Philosophy of Spirit, and it has a long history in Hegel’s development. Life emerged as an independent topic in the second Jenaer Systementwürfe of 1805–6, and the notion played a crucial if opaque role in the most important chapter, on self-consciousness, in his Jena Phenomenology of Spirit. Indeed, in the preface to that book, he was already saying that “science,” or logic, “may organize itself only through the proper life of the concept,” and that in such a science, we understand “the self-moving soul of the content which has been brought to fruition” (die sich bewegende Seele des erfüllten Inhalts [PhG §53]). The notions of liveliness and enlivened, Lebendigkeit and belebt, are also the central notions in his account of fine art. But it is the “logical status” of life, its a priori status and therewith its “origin” if not empirical, that he regarded as the fundamental issue. The summary formulation of the concept life is that life is the “Idea” (aka “The Truth,” or what is, in its truth, the actualized concept) “in its immediacy.” In Hegel’s treatment, once we properly understand the logical structure of life, by which he means, for living being, the unique relation of an object to its concept, we will be in a position to understand that relation (object and concept) in Knowing (Erkennen) in both its theoretical and practical dimensions, and this will allow a retrospective summation of the truth of that relation in “the Absolute Idea.” He is referring to the fact that an instance of an organic kind not merely is subsumable under a concept, but exemplifies its kind well or poorly. In such cases we can speak of near perfection or deformity. We can’t say that about an even number, or plutonium. This acknowledgment then raises the question of being as being-true. What it is to be in truth is for something to exemplify what it is to be such a thing, to manifest its concept.

As we have noted before, if we understand the structure of the Logic as some kind of ascent or progress, and if we think of that progress as measured by degrees of any rendering intelligible, the former stage always requiring the latter as condition, then the essential predicative forms we study in the Logic’s three books will be (i) S is P, (ii) S is essentially P, and (iii) S is a good P. Teleological explanation (for artifacts, actions, and organic beings) is the beginning of wisdom about such a higher degree of intelligibility, and so will help us understand why the conceptual structure involved in understanding living beings best realizes what Erkennen in both its theoretical and its practical dimensions seeks. (On this scale the “absolutely” intelligible would be, to use Aryeh Kosman’s phrase for a similar claim in Aristotle, “thinking thinking thinking.”)3 Put another way, the “pure thinking” that was the source of any possible objective determinateness (Bestimmtheit) in the objective logic is now itself the object as well as the subject of thinking in the “subjective logic.” Thinking is pure thinking in this treatment, but the metalogical inquiry must be able to account for what we have seen in the objective logic, that thinking as such has a developmental and dynamic structure. Accordingly, in this chapter we will discuss the dynamism of pure thinking itself (in Kant and in Hegel); in the next chapter the notion that organic life is a logical concept; and in the final chapter the unity of the theoretical and practical idea.

Here the issue is what Hegel’s frequently invoked metaphor, that concepts have a “life,” that they “move,” that they are in some sense “alive,” really amounts to. We have been tracking that issue all along, and now that the topic of the Logic is conceptuality itself, it is time to address it. The issue is already introduced in the closing words of the logic of essence, where Hegel tells us that, with the topic of the concept as such, we are entering “the realm of subjectivity and freedom” (11.409), a language that has an unmistakable but mysterious practical air. He makes a little clearer what that might mean in a preliminary remark (Vorbericht), dated July 21, 1816. I say only a little clearer because he moves immediately to explain that metaphor with several other metaphors, with a reference to the Christian Bible and to a poem by Klopstock.4 He reminds us that there is already a well-established, long-standing conventional understanding of logic, and so of the Concept (which I will capitalize when the topic is, as it mostly is throughout the third book, conceptuality itself). There is, he notes, a textbook understanding of concepts and their roles in judgments and the role of judgments in syllogisms. But he complains that such “material” is not only “finished” (fertiges) and “entrenched” (festgewordenes) but “ossified” (verknöchtertes). His task, he says, is to introduce a “fluidity” (Flüssigkeit) into such material and to spark or ignite or animate (entzünden) a living concept in such dead matter (den lebendigen Begriff in solchem todten Stoffe [12.5]). He then complains about the difficulty of his task, switching metaphors again, and compares his project to building a new city in “devastated” land (öden Land), a task rendered all the more difficult when the land is occupied by an ancient and “solidly constructed” city. One must decide above all, he insists, not to make use of what is already there, “not to make use of much otherwise valued stock” (von vielem sonst wertgeachtetem des Vorraths).

What exactly is he talking about? More figurative language follows. We will presumably understand better how he understands this novel approach to the Concept when we understand that the essential issue is “truth.” He indicates he means “truth” in that sense which now stands under great suspicion, the same suspicion that Pontius Pilate expressed when he asked the crowd “What is truth?” As the quotation from Klopstock is meant to confirm, the question is meant as a mocking one at worst, a skeptical one at best. The reference is to John 18:38.

‘Then you are a king?’ Pilate said. ‘You say that I am a king,’ Jesus answered. ‘For this reason I was born and have come into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.’ ‘What is truth?’ Pilate asked. And having said this, he went out again to the Jews and told them, ‘I find no basis for a charge against him.’

In the interpretation we have been developing, this unusual passage returns us here to issues first addressed in chapter 2, and to the passage quoted there. It is worth repeating:

The science that has pure knowledge for its principle and is a unity which is not abstract but living and concrete, so that the opposition of consciousness between a being subjectively existing for itself, and another but objectively existing such being, has been overcome in it, and being is known to be in itself a pure concept and the pure concept to be true being. These, then, are the two moments contained in logic. But they are now known to exist inseparably, not as in consciousness, where each exists for itself; it is for this reason and this reason alone, because they are at the same time known to be distinct [unterschiedene] (yet not to exist for themselves), that their unity is not abstract, dead and inert, but concrete. (21.45)

To be is to be determinate, a this, not a that; but anything can be a determinate this only as a this-such. Determinacy is conceptual determinacy. So what a thing is, in its “truth,” is its concept. At the level of the most general formulation of this claim, the Concept, conceptuality as such, is the truth of being. There are many alternate formulations given in the opening section proper of the logic of the Concept: the truth of being is the concept, the “absolute unity of being”; it is being in and for itself, or most generally “Gesetztsein,” positedness. Hegel claimed that positedness was the result of the analysis of substance; positedness means being as being rendered intelligible, that what it is to be anything determinate is ultimately the self-determining (and so internally self-negating) concept. Therein lies its life, but that has remained extremely abstract so far. And it is important that being is conceptuality, not a material “made” intelligible by the exercise of a subjective power, as if intelligible only “for us,” as if “our activity” alone constitutes this life. What a thing is, in truth, is its intelligibility, or the Concept with all that has come to entail: the self-conscious and self-determining conceptual moments necessary for anything to be the determinate thing it is, for concepts to function as the ground of determinacy.5 Hence the question: what is such self-determining such that it is at the same time an aspect of being in its intelligibility and the activity of thinking?

We have become, Hegel notes, skeptical about the question of what anything is in truth. This is the point of the Pilate reference. In the presence of truth, he asks skeptically, “What is truth?” as if to say, “who knows?” Thus, he finds there is no basis in any charge against Jesus. It is likewise with questions like: What truly is religion? What truly is it to be a human being, Geist? What truly is art? All questions he will raise in the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences. In the Logic the question is dual: What is being such that it is intelligible? What is the intelligibility of being? For us, Hegel complains, the question seems to live on only in religion. “The” question that philosophy uniquely pursues is not altogether clear yet, but later Hegel indicates that he means to differentiate questions about various empirical concepts and causal relations from an inquiry into conceptuality and causality (or substantiality) as such. Or he will say things like: philosophy (and he seems to be thinking of philosophy as exhibited in the Phenomenology of Spirit) is interested not in a simple factual narrative of what happened but instead in what “is true in what happens,” where that seems to mean what, in what happened, reveals something about what it is to be Geist (12.22). In the Logic, “the question” is, what is it for anything truly to be what it is? But now with Hegel, so goes the bold claim, philosophy can regain its rightful position as the path to such issues. This competition was already suggested by Hegel’s assuming the role of Jesus in the Pilate analogy. It is Hegel who apparently now truly understands “Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.” That is, he understands it better than Jesus. (It is quite a remarkable passage for those with a theological interpretation of Hegel.) The chief task of philosophy is to account for this conceptuality. We have been concentrating on how it can be shown that any objective being can be what it truly is only because of a conceptual determinacy that requires an understanding of qualitative and quantitative modes of determinacy (also called simply “being” and “immediacy”), and an understanding of essence and appearance (also called reflection and mediation). This account is what he soon will call the “becoming” of the logic of the Concept; we have shown the “foundational” status of the concept, not by beginning with it but by having arrived at it as a result (12.11). Now we turn our attention to the concept of conceptuality itself, a reflexive self-determination of conceptuality itself which thereby is the “absolute” or highest mode of intelligibility, the concept’s self-explication. (Hegel begins calling the subject matter of the logic of the Concept the “concept of the concept” at 12.16.) As we have seen throughout, to revert to Kosman’s formulation, only pure thinking can determine what it is to be thinking, where this first means pure thinking’s determination of what it is to think anything other than thought. Now we are on the verge of the Aristotelian heights: pure thinking thinking thinking itself as its object. As we noted earlier in describing the difficult task German Idealism sets itself, it is in thinking thinking thinking that thinking thinks anything that can be thought, or being. Because of this self-reflective autonomy, Hegel also wants to call the account the “realm of freedom and subjectivity.” (It is, by being the realm of pure thinking, a “cause of itself” [die Ursache ihrer selbst] and so the substance “freed” into the concept [die zum Begriffe befreyte Substanz] [12.16].) This has to do not with the production of thoughts, but with something like the Concept’s self-authorization.

It will take us a while to unpack the full implications of this latter claim (especially since Hegel initially explains it by saying that freedom will be shown to be the “truth of necessity and the relational mode of the concept” [12.12]), but our task now is to understand that chief metaphor of the Vorbericht. What could it mean to understand concepts not as dead Stoff, but as “alive”? I propose that we in effect “back up” quite far and get something of a running start before leaping into that new territory, by preparing ourselves (always a good idea in modern German philosophy) with Kant.

Kant on Reason’s Conatus
In turning to Kant’s own views of the dynamism of reason, we should first note something of the highest importance that we have mentioned before. Especially given later worries about “psychologism” in neo-Kantianism, and because it has been a persistent criticism of any Kant-indebted Hegel that this must amount to a “subjective idealism,” turning to the status of “mental activity” in Kant is a vexed and difficult issue, also worthy of a long, independent treatment. Very briefly, as Kant sees it, when we attend to what a subject must be able to do to count as a knower or a doer, what capacities she must have, our conclusion is supposed to be a logical one, dependent on the concept of knowing itself or acting itself (the determination of which must be reason’s self-determination, as Kant often insists), not on any psychological matters of fact. In that sense a cognitive mental act is neither mere “activity,” in the sense in which we might speak of a computer’s processing as its current activity (cognitive activity is norm responsive), nor an intentional action (one does not perceive or believe “on purpose”). Knowing as a capacity, in its actualization, has a distinct form, without which it would not be a case of knowing. We may intentionally or “on purpose” take up the task of trying to understand why something happened, but as we gather evidence and test hypotheses, we are not—in, say, perceiving, or in judging on the basis of perceiving—intentionally doing something for the sake of something. The power of perceiving or the power of knowing (or their failure) is what it is (has its distinct end) in independence from whatever else we may also be trying to accomplish. According to Aristotle, for example, the actuality of an axe, its formal and final cause, is cutting, the actuality of the eye is seeing. None of this implies that the axe or the eye is purposively acting in its proper actualization. Cognitive activity is an actualization in that sense. But it is also true that the capacities of the eye are for an end, its distinct end as what it is, or qua eye. And in that sense the capacities necessary for knowing are for an end which knowing has, qua knowing. (The spontaneous capacity too has a formal and final causality, not serial or successive, but immanent and simultaneous.)

Moreover, Kant’s talk of separate powers can be misleading, especially as it concerns the understanding and reason, capacities so central to the argument of the first Critique, and now as it concerns the topic or faculty he discovered much later, reflective judgment. They are not separate capacities in the way that swimming might be one capacity an individual has, and speaking Russian another capacity. The understanding and reason (and finally, reflective judgment) are manifestations of one capacity, thinking, the spontaneous faculty, differentiated in terms of their different functions in different contexts. There is understanding, Verstand, or thinking, considered with respect to what is the case, or in terms of the possible objects of thought, in the basic sense of claiming or judging about objects other than thought, objects that must be provided to such thinking, cannot be self-given, all on the one hand; and, on the other, reason, Vernunft, thinking considered without such restriction, or thinking in so far as it is purely self-determining, thinking whose object is itself.6 In this latter sense, one thinks first, of course, of pure practical rationality, self-determining both in the sense that only reason can determine what the exercise of practical reason consists in, and in the sense that to act is to have a maxim one must give oneself, or it is to have a reason for the action that one counts as such a reason. But reason in its theoretical use, what Kant calls its “hypothetical use,” is also self-determining. Here is one formulation of the issue:

If the understanding may be a faculty of unity of appearances by means of rules, then reason is the faculty of the unity of the rules of understanding under principles. Thus it never applies directly to experience or to any object, but instead applies to the understanding, in order to give unity a priori through concepts to understanding’s manifold cognitions, which may be called ‘the unity of reason,’ and is of an altogether different kind than any unity that can be achieved by the understanding. (CPR B359/A302)

The structure of reason in this use is broadly syllogistic, as it is in Hegel, because Kant thinks of the basic model of inferring as syllogistic. In the first Critique and the logic lectures model, the understanding is responsible for some general principle or law, judgment determines whether an individual or event falls under the law, and reason draws the inference. And in general, reason in this hypothetical use results in descending or ascending specification, even though all of this is only the beginning of Kant’s account of the various functions reason performs. But understanding as it is used in this quotation cannot be a distinct object for or to reason, as such objects are normally understood. That would be psychology. Reason’s determination of the unity of the “manifold cognitions” of the understanding is the determination by thought of itself, of its own unity. (This perfectly parallels the Analytic’s claim that experience, the possible representation of an object at all, requires a unity that cannot be supplied by experience. Thinking provides this unity for itself, by itself.) Any such higher unity can never be an object of experience, but it is also the case that such postulations are not mere heuristic posits, dispensable or alterable as practical needs dictate. Every exercise of reason qua reason is a necessary self-determination (and obviously, it is with this sort of language that we are already in Hegel country). It is in this sense that reason has a logical use. Its determination of the relations among thoughts without which thinking could not be thinking at all (or logic) is, again, a self-determination, a self-constituting act, not a grasping or perceiving. It must be so in order to keep faith with Kant’s most important break with the prior (ancient and modern) rationalist tradition and with the modern empiricist tradition. All thinking is a spontaneity, an activity, not a perceiving or a grasping. This is true for reflective judging as well.7 It is this Spontaneität considered in terms of a special function, “determining” a unity without which various empirical diversities would not be fully intelligible but which is distinct from reason’s self-determined demand to seek the unconditioned, the highest form of unity, and a unity which cannot be said to be based on empirical material itself. (I assume it is also clear that this capacity itself cannot be said to have a dynamic. The rational being—any rational being, whether human or not—in the exercise of this capacity is exercising a purposively structured capacity.) I turn now to more detail about this manifestation of spontaneity.

What is important for our discussions is the simple fact that the activity of attending under such a principle is itself purposive, an active, teleologically structured attending. (In the first Critique, Kant called reason a “purposive activity” (zweckmäßige Tätigkeit [B128/A94]), in effect, if not literally, the very same language Hegel uses in the preface of the Phenomenology (daß die Vernunft das zweckmäßige Tun ist [PhG §22]). Very simply put, we must be looking for (and so assuming) as a goal regularities and similarities in order for them to show up appropriately. And here is what Kant says in the published introduction to the Critique of the Power of Judgment about the necessity of our doing so, or the nature of reason’s authority in this case, as he introduces a strange term we have seen before in this study.

The power of judgment thus also has in itself an a priori principle for the possibility of nature, though only in a subjective respect, by means of which it prescribes a law, not to nature (as autonomy), but to itself (as heautonomy) for reflection on nature, which one could call the law of the specification of nature with regard to its empirical laws.8

This self-directed, heautonomous activity is an idea not unique to the third Critique, even though he does not use that strange neologism elsewhere. In fact he describes the whole project of the first Critique in these self-engendering terms, something Hegel always insisted on. Kant is interested in the Critique of Pure Reason in what he says our “cognitive faculty . . . provides out of itself” (B1). Hegel will ask why we should not also say that the categorical structure of experience is what reason requires of itself, with no threat of subjectivism if understood properly; why not say that the moral law is what reason requires of itself? Why isn’t the principle of all philosophy heautonomy?

Kant tells us that “the proper principle of reason in general (in its logical use) is to find the unconditioned for conditioned cognitions” (CPR B364/A307). And it is in this context that he begins to speak of “this need of reason” (dieses Bedürfnis der Vernunft [B365/A309]) for such an attempt, and so introduces the thought that the exercise of reason is purposive, must be understood to have an end. He makes the same point several times in introducing us to the ideas of reason. In discussing Plato, he says,

Plato noted very well that our power of cognition [Erkenntniskraft] feels a far higher need [ein weit höheres Bedürfnis fühle] than that of merely spelling out appearances according to a synthetic unity in order to be able to read them as experience, and that our reason naturally exalts itself to cognitions that go much too far for any object that experience can give ever to be congruent, but that nonetheless have their reality [ihre Realität haben] and are by no means merely figments of the brain [Hirngespinste]. (CPR B370/A314)

This is the same language he uses in the published introduction to the third Critique: “Consequently, since the lawful unity in a combination that we cognize as in accordance with a necessary aim [einer notwendigen Absicht] (a need [Bedürfnis] of the understanding) but yet at the same time as contingent in itself is represented as a purposiveness of the objects . . .”9 He does not explain how an Erkenntniskraft can “feel” a need, but it is not hard to construct an explanation. Since, according to Kant’s apperception requirement, any judging is also the consciousness of judging (no one can be claiming something without knowing that is what she is doing), judging must be implicitly a subscription to the requirements of any such judging (thus including the commitment to be able to provide reasons for the judgment, to be denying anything inconsistent with the judgment and so forth, to be able to integrate the judgment in a consistent whole of other beliefs held), and more broadly, any putative act of knowing involves apperceptively a putative realization of what knowing should be. In this sense the attempt to know, Erkennen, as centrally a judging, is also a self-consciously purposive activity, end-directed (it aims at knowledge, Wissen, unqualifiedly and unconditionally knowledge) and self-constituting (only reason can determine what the removal of such qualifications would amount to). In the case of the understanding, or judging informed by sensible intuition, this means that any instance of judging is an awareness that the judgment is a piece of conditioned knowledge, and no such awareness, since it is an awareness of an attempt to know, can avoid in the completion of the pursuit of such an end this “need” to seek the unconditioned. Such an end is inseparable from any pursuit of the end of knowing itself. This appears to be what he means by “feeling” a need.

Now of course Kant also thought that this need could not be satisfied, that our desire must remain unrequited (like an unrequited lover, in a simile Kant himself used to describe the fate of metaphysics). But this limitation is often misunderstood. For the fullest statement of Kant’s position is that while there are metaphysical questions whose answers we cannot, strictly speaking, know, it is also the case that these are matters that we also cannot doubt. “Unknowable but indubitable” is his highly heterodox position. And that “cannot be doubted” introduces a kind of practical necessity into the picture that is very relevant to our theme. For Kant’s picture is not of lost souls tapping around, tragically lost in the dark, despite a famous image that suggests this. Rather he is suggesting that our relation to these issues is not a relation of knowing in the experiential or empirical sense, suggesting that the issues themselves are wrongly conceived when understood this way. The relation is some sort of practical relation, or a practical Faktum, which carries with it its own sort of practical necessity, one that can be said to have a priority—again a practical priority—over the capacities and limitations of reason in its theoretical use. It is the same sort of practical necessity that is at issue in reason’s Bedürfnis, in the inevitability of the attempt to ascend to the unconditioned, and so it delimits the kind of practical reality he was referring to when he said that the domain outside of what could be experienced had “its own Realität,” was not a realm of Hirngespinste. It is this notion of practical necessity that I want now to pursue in Hegel.

Hegel on Reason’s Need
The issue of reason’s internal dynamic, its conative dimension, arises at the heart of everything distinctive in Hegel’s project. For example, none of his books has a deductive or analytic structure, but always a developmental one. They are all structured around what he often calls thought’s or the concept’s “movement.” As we have seen several times, his most frequent word for all the categorical concepts treated by the Science of Logic is thought-determination, Denkbestimmung, and he means thought’s gradual and finally exhaustive self-determination, its determination of what it is to be thinking objectively, in the sense of either claiming what is the case or asserting what ought to be done. (Kant’s terms are probably not ultimately helpful, but we can use them to say that for Hegel reason’s authority is a matter of a heautonomy that is also an autonomy.) Thought, for Hegel also understood as itself a mode of engagement with the world and others, is internally animated, and so even the forbidding Science of Logic has to be understood as just as much a kind of narrative in its way as the much better known Phenomenology of Spirit, as much as the lectures on fine art, religion, and world history are narratives, and his claim is that these narratives have a teleological structure, and that means an internal necessity.

As we have seen in some detail since chapter 2, the most difficult idea behind the project of the Logic is its assumption that we do not need any Kantian “transcendental deduction,” establishing that pure forms of thought are the forms of being. The assumptions behind that kind of a project are misleading and rejected in the Phenomenology of Spirit, entertained there in order to free ourselves from them, from the idea of a subject-object divide, or gap, which must be bridged. Instead, as commentators of many different sorts (including this commentator in chapter 5) have always realized, an enormous justificatory weight is placed on the beginning of the Logic. Hegel, in introducing his own idea of what Kant would call a transcendental not a general logic (not the conditions for thinking as such, but the necessary conditions of thought’s having an object), entertains the bare thinkability of anything at all in order to establish that such a mere prospect, mere being, considered in its pure indeterminacy, is not a thinkable thought, and not because of any subjective limitation on our part. Thought is determinate, discursive, and anything that can be thought is therefore determinately articulable (primarily predicatively). To consider being in its thinkability is simply to think it as it is. The forms of thought are the forms of being because to be is to be intelligible. (This is Aristotelian, as we have often said, but also, in a different register, Frege’s thought: “A fact is a thought that is true.”)10 And intelligibility is always determinate, this and not that. This is the first result of the Logic, and Hegel names this relation of “this and not that” “becoming,” Werden. Whatever turns out to be necessary to fulfill the conditions of such determinacy, conditions necessary for thought to have determinate objects, is the exfoliation of the articulability of being itself. As inadequacies are revealed in satisfying this condition of determinateness, those inadequacies count as ontologically inadequate. Being has not been sufficiently understood in its determinateness. We should recall the way Hegel put the point in §24 of the Encyclopedia Logic, when he wrote that “nous governs the world.”11

The logical is to be sought in a system of thought-determinations in which the antithesis between subjective and objective (in its usual meaning) disappears. This meaning of thinking and of its determinations is more precisely expressed by the ancients when they say that nous governs the world, or by our own saying that there is reason in the world, by which we mean that reason is the soul of the world, inhabits it, and is immanent in it as its own innermost nature, its universal.

To summarize our discussions in chapters 2 and 3, Hegel is referring to the ancients here because, as he so often is throughout the Logic, he is thinking of Aristotle. The basic unit of sense-making, in Aristotle, in Kant, and in a revised way in Hegel, is the predicative act. So, as noted in chapter 2, in Aristotle we can study actuality by studying the predicative act. What there is must be determinate, and its “determinations” are just possible predicates, the content of which depends on their roles in possible judgments, possible copulative relations. Entities are the determinate entities they are “in terms of” or “because of” their concept or substantial form. For all of these similarities, though, it is Kant, and the doctrine of knowledge as a productive power, or reason as spontaneity, that separates Hegel from Aristotle.12

So in knowing itself, what pure thought knows is the intelligibility, the knowability, of anything that is. But the intelligibility of anything is just the answer to the “what it is to be that thing” (or said more precisely: in answer to the “what is it to be able to say what something is”) question definitive of metaphysics since Aristotle. So in knowing itself, thought knows of all things what it is to be anything. Again, as for Aristotle, the task of metaphysics is not to say of any particular thing what it is. That is the task of the special sciences: medicine, statecraft. It is to determine what must be true of anything at all, such that what it is in particular can be determined (or: what is necessarily presupposed in any such specification).

Those terms Hegel uses to describe the developmental aspect of his methodology—movement, moment, animation, even “pulsation” or “alive”—might now be, in the context of Kant’s claims about reason, perhaps not so mysterious. This connection with Kant’s views on the purposive and productive nature of reason can, though, be difficult to make out. The first reason for this is that the radicality of Kant’s position is often not fully appreciated, his insistence that reason never “begs” from nature but always “commands” (CPR B681/A653) and his adoption of the mathematical sciences as his model for philosophy. That is, his famous proposal is that objects must conform to reason’s wholly self-determined requirements, rather than the other way around, in just the same sense that Newtonian mechanics is not an empirical science—the Copernican revolution, in other words. (Newtonian mechanics is also not a subjective grid imposed on nature; it represents the “truth” of nature.) Here is how Hegel puts his self-determination claim:

They [pure essentialities, logical concepts] are pure thoughts, spirit that thinks its essence. Their self-movement is their spiritual life and is that through which science constitutes itself, and of which it is the exposition. (21.8)

When he tries to explain this later on that page, he makes even more use of his own formulations, which are idiosyncratic to say the least.

This spiritual movement, which in its simplicity gives itself its determinateness, and in this determinateness gives itself its self-equality—this movement, which is thus the immanent development of the concept, is the absolute method of the concept, the absolute method of cognition and at the same time the immanent soul of the content.—On this self-constructing path alone, I say, is philosophy capable of being objective, demonstrative science. (Ibid.)

I cannot see that there is any essential difference between this position and that articulated by Kant in all the major sections of the Critique of Pure Reason, in the “pure” derivation of categories through the Metaphysical Deduction, in the general goal of establishing a priori that such categories are not subjective impositions but constitute what it could be to be an object of experience, and in the derivation of reason’s structure for the understanding’s knowledge, that structure that, for Kant, had its own “reality.” That self-determining activity is given its most ambitious expression in the doctrine of reflective judgment. Hegel certainly has a different evaluation of the results. (More on this in the next chapter.) He sees them not as self-imposed limitations on reason, but as constituting the intelligible structure of reality, and there is a radical boldness in his rejection of the idea of a reality or truth beyond any ability of ours to determine what it is.

But it is in his account of how his project will show that this “movement” occurs that matters get apparently un-Kantian. For Hegel says,

contradiction is the root of all movement [Bewegung] and vitality [Lebendigkeit]; it is only in so far as something has a contradiction within it that it moves, has an urge [Trieb] and activity [Tätigkeit]. (11.286)

Or, as he puts it further along in the logic of essence,

Now the negativity just considered constitutes the turning point of the movement of the concept. It is the simple point of the negative self-reference, the innermost source of all activity [Tätigkeit], of living and spiritual self-movement [Selbstbewegung]; it is the dialectical soul which everything true possesses and through which alone it is true; for on this subjectivity [Subjektivität] alone rests the sublation [Aufhebung] of the opposition between concept and reality, and the unity which is truth. (12.246)

If we keep in mind this Kantian context, recall the essentially practical and productive character of the power of reason, recall that the sense-bearing unit of intelligibility for both Kant and Hegel is the judgment, and that judgments are necessarily self-conscious judgments, and so claimable only in the context of some awareness of their finitude or conditioned nature, then claims like these by Hegel look less mysterious.

The upshot of all these reminders is that the contradiction that Hegel is referring to is always an essentially practical contradiction, an activity’s contradiction of its own end, something that gets clearer, I hope, if we recall Kant’s account of the inherent purposiveness of reflective judgment and the hypothetical use of reason. Take, for example, the kind of things he says about the necessity of any development, that of the empirical sciences, for example. He will often say things that seem outrageous philosophically: that philosophy gives the form of necessity to what would otherwise appear merely contingent, as at EL §12A. This can sound as if Hegel wants to say that the actual course of that development, philosophy can prove, could not have happened otherwise, as if, in science as well as philosophy (logic), there is a development over time that could not have been otherwise. If this sort of claim is supported by a claim about a self-transforming, underlying metaphysical entity, “cosmic spirit,” or “God,” developing according to some necessary law of internal teleology, then the claim seems hopeless. At a more modest level, though (and this is very much how I think he wants to be understood), he could mean that a significant transition in art history, or political history, or religious history, a shift in collective ethical commitments, or a development in a speculative logic (that the content of some determinate concept cannot be fixed without reliance on a successor, more comprehensive concept) can all be rendered intelligible by a philosophical account. This account is based on a form of practical contradiction that introduces a more familiar form of necessity and one different from logical necessity or material necessity, the form appropriate to “he who wills the end must will, or necessarily wills, the means” (otherwise we have evidence that he has not truly willed the end). If a collective attempt to accomplish some goal can be said to learn collectively that commitment to that end is impossible without commitment to, let us say, a broader and more comprehensive end, then it must pursue such a new end or give up the enterprise. Or if it develops that the means chosen actually make achieving the end impossible, then the means must be altered. They are not arbitrarily altered. They must be altered, on pain of practical incoherence. A philosophical account, assuming the rationality of such a teleological enterprise, can show this. It can give the form of (practical) necessity to what would otherwise seem contingent alterations. (So if reason can be said to have an end indispensible to its possible realization, any means indispensable to that end are likewise indispensable, necessary in that sense. This sort of argument plays out at the highest level of conceptual abstraction for Hegel.)

As noted before, the paradigmatic and most importance instance of this sort of conceptual self-determination occurs at the outset of the Logic, in the demonstration of the absurdity of any attempt to think “being qua being.” The mark of the practical nature of this beginning is his remark that, at the beginning of the attempt, “There is only present the resolve [Entschluß], which can also be viewed as arbitrary, of considering thinking as such” (21.56). This is a failure that demonstrates the necessarily discursive nature of thinking (“to think being” is not thinking at all; neither, for that matter, can there be any “grasping” of horseness or seeing beauty in itself). This kind of self-correcting enterprise, with the same ontological import, reappears throughout. So a view that seeks to account for determinateness of objects, and so for our capacity to account for such determinateness, in terms strictly of directly apprehensible qualitative and quantitative predication (what he calls a logic of being), is argued to be unable to achieve its purpose, cannot provide more than endless, unrestricted lists of properties and measures, and so to fails to specify determinateness. Any such attempt to do so is necessarily self-consciously such an attempt, and that means aware of the proximal end that would count as success in such an enterprise: this being successfully fully differentiated from that. In terms similar to those of Kant’s account of the necessity of some dissatisfaction with conditioned knowledge and so of the “need” of reason to be “felt,” awareness of this deficiency is inextricably linked with an awareness of what must be done to correct it.

Such a self-reflective movement in developments like the latter is what Hegel is trying to summarize in his own inimitable way in this passage.

Internal self-movement, self-movement proper, drive in general (the appetite or nisus of the monad, the entelechy of the absolutely simple essence) is likewise nothing else than that something is, in itself, itself and the lack of itself (the negative), in one and the same respect. Abstract self-identity is not yet vitality; but the positive, since implicitly it is negativity, goes out of itself and sets its alteration in motion. Something is alive, therefore, only to the extent that it contains contradiction within itself: indeed, force is this, to hold and endure contradiction within. (11.287)

Here he is referring to the “contradiction” that he develops in the logic of essence, first that we cannot differentiate the essential from nonessential properties without knowing the essence, yet we cannot know the essence without specifying just these essential properties. It might of course seem improbable that one could get so much conceptual content out of reflection on the conditions for determinate predication, but the point here is only to show the initial bearing of these Kantian elements: the essentially practical and productive character of the power of reason, the sense-bearing unity of intelligibility as the judgment, and the necessarily self-conscious character of judgments, which can be claimed only in the context of some awareness of their finitude or conditioned nature.

Finally, this leaves us with a problem much too large to address adequately. I have suggested that this model of reason’s purposive activity, with its corollary that reason’s understanding of itself, of just this, its own activity, is necessarily developmental, that this development in Hegel is not driven by empirical discovery or the forming of more successfully adaptive strategies, and its additional corollary that this development is driven by an essentially practical form of contradiction, or a self-contradiction, can be understood only within a much wider frame than cognitive consistency or the achieving of compatible commitments. This is because the process just crudely sketched, something like an account of possible account-givings, has as its goal a kind of self-knowledge that plays a crucial role in Hegel’s theory of freedom and its realization. That theory of freedom is not a free will or individual causal agency theory, and rather depends essentially on a collectively achieved, shared understanding (one become habitual and implicit in ordinary life) of one’s involvement with institutions and with others, generally described as being-with-self-in-others. At a limited level of “logical” self-understanding, such as what Hegel calls Verstand, these relations cannot be properly understood, and instead are thought of either as sacrifices of individuality by the individual, or the domination of individuals by larger social wholes and their requirements. It is not, in Hegel, that the logical insufficiency is said to be responsible for the practical experience of unfreedom. (This is again the mistake about Hegel that Marx kept making.) Rather, both reflect the same incomplete level of self-understanding, and so both are, to revert to the image used earlier, two sides of the same coin. In its full Hegelian flourish, the claim is for an identity of the Idea of the True and the Idea of the Good in the Absolute Idea.

 
    