4
# LOGIC AND NEGATION
The Manifold Senses of Negation
Hegel is willing to say some extraordinary things about the concept he sometimes calls “negation,” sometimes “negativity.” What he has been taken to mean has been the source of most of the criticism of Hegel: that he confused logical negation with actual opposition, as in the oppositions of forces or magnitudes in general in the world; that he thought everything in the world contradicted itself, and so believed that pairs of contradictory judgments could both be affirmed; or simply that what he said about negation and contradiction cannot be coherently understood. And any commentator must also face the fact that he invoked the notion of negation in many different contexts in many different ways. So the first task is to have in view that variety of contexts before we can understand what they all might have in common (if anything).

There are five contexts that I want to summarize briefly before attempting an overall interpretation. There is first the claim that thinking itself should be understood as a “negating” activity. This is meant in two senses. One concerns the “negative” dimension of the judging act itself; the other concerns why Hegel would think that any individual act of determination (or predication) should itself be understood as a kind of negating. It is certainly not intuitively clear what asserting that S is P might have to do with negation in either of these senses. The second context of discussion will be more marked for further discussion later than explored here (it involves what I have called the question of the “bearing” of the SL on a kind of emancipation): this is the link evident in many remarks between the “power of the negative” and “freedom.” The third will turn out to be the crux of the matter: why and how the determinate content of any concept is primarily intelligible contrastively, in its negative relation with, and so a kind of dependence on, what it is not. (In the logic of being, this is a contrast with its contraries, square with nonsquare or circle, and not with everything not square, like elephant.) This is again an intuitively difficult issue: why should something like S’s being S, and so its not being non-S have anything to do with opposition or dialectic? We will see some of the importance of this notion by understanding briefly the role it plays in the structure of the three logics. The fourth context in which negation is introduced connects the concept to Hegel’s understanding of speculative truth. And the fifth involves the knotty problem of contradiction.

Thinking as Negating
Here is a typical passage in which Hegel associates thinking with negating:

The understanding determines, and holds the determination fixed. Reason is negative and dialectical, since it dissolves the determinations of the understanding into nothing; it is positive, since it generates the universal, and comprehends the particular therein. Just as the understanding is usually taken as something separate from reason in general, so also dialectical reason is taken as something separate from positive reason. In its truth reason is however spirit, which is higher than both reason bound to the understanding and understanding bound to reason. It is the negative, that which constitutes the quality of both the dialectical reason and the understanding: it negates the simple, thereby posits the determinate difference of the understanding; but it equally dissolves this difference, and so it is dialectical. (21.8, my emphasis)

Hegel already spoke of “the tremendous power of the negative” in the Jena Phenomenology and simply identified it, in a way of great importance to this study, with “the energy of thought, of the pure I.” In the first edition of the SL, in a remark he left out of the 1831 revision, he calls negation “the truly real and being-in-itself” (das wahrhafte Reale und Ansichseyn) and writes that negativity is the “abstract foundation of all philosophical ideas and speculative thinking in general,” and that it is only in our time, the “new time,” that we have even begun to understand it (11.77). When, in the last volume of the Logic, he comments on this “new” understanding of his, he is as clear about its supreme importance as he is difficult to understand.

Now the negativity just considered constitutes the turning point of the movement of the concept. It is the simple point of the negative self-reference, the innermost source of all activity [Tätigkeit], of living and spiritual self-movement [Selbstbewegung]; it is the dialectical soul which everything true possesses and through which alone it is true; for on this subjectivity [Subjektivität] alone rests the sublation [Aufhebung] of the opposition between concept and reality, and the unity which is truth. (12.246)

One aspect of what he means, especially his identification of negativity with “the energy of thought, of the pure I,” and the striking reference to “subjectivity,” has already emerged from the discussion in the last chapter. The apperceptive character of judging is what accounts for this characterization of the judging act itself as having the status of something inherently “negative” as well as positive. Any judgment entails the exclusion of the possibility of many other judgments being true, and this is an aspect of self-conscious judging, a logical element of the judgment as a whole. Hegel wants in the SL to give “negativity,” nonbeing, what is not, the ontological status, fullness, or presence of “positive being,” a “logical,” not “phenomenological” treatment. But these are different treatments of the same issue. In the simplest sense, we are talking about the logical structure of apperceptive intentional knowledge, as well as the ontological status of agency. What it means to claim that the intelligibility of any content of empirical knowledge is not a wholly “positive” phenomenon in Hegel’s (Kantian and post-Kantian) way of looking at it is best understood by contrast. If it were not so and were wholly positive, subjectivity would be something like a mere complex registering and responding device (of the same ontological status as a thermometer). That is, conceived now “logically”—that is, not as a problem of perceptual or experiential consciousness itself, but as a claim based on perception, an empirical judgment about the world (“there is a red book on the table”)—the claim is that it cannot be such a claim if it is simply wrung out of one by a perceptual episode (call this a “pure positivity” model, not the most felicitous of expressions but it gets at what Hegel wants to say by his positive-negative contrast).1 As we have seen, one is not simply wholly absorbed in the presence of the world to one, not wholly and merely reactive to the stimulation of sensibility, and that “not” is the beginning (but certainly not the end) of all the logical issues of negation that emerge in Hegel’s philosophy, at both the phenomenological and the logical level. In making such a judgment I “negate” the mere immediacy or givenness of perceptual content, negate it as immediate and putatively given, and take up, am always taking up, a position of sorts about what is there, what is the case (cf. EL §12A). What thinking is is such “negation” of one’s immediate, “positive” state. (One can say: this negation of mere immediacy is “taking a stand,” rather than being put into a state.) Any thinking could be a seeming-to-be-the-case, not what is the case, and that possibility is constitutive of the act’s being a judging from the outset. That judgment as such is potentially self-negating, rather than merely otherwise determined, does not mean (in the Platonic sense of nonbeing as otherness in The Sophist) that a judgment is just “other” than a purely positive responding mechanism. The potential for such self-negation is constitutive of a judgment’s possibility as judgment.

This does not of course mean that a component of any judgment is some reservation one attends to, as if the true, logical form of any judgment were the ridiculously hesitant: “I assert p; but, for all I know, I may be wrong.” The constitutive feature attended to in a Hegelian philosophical logic is the fact that judgments are potentially responsive to reasons and revisions just qua judgments. The fact that they are miscategorized if treated as wholly positive or as mere mental events does not mean that they reside, by contrast, in some domain of nonbeing.2 It simply means that asserting something to be the case would not be an assertion unless already, in its very logical mode of being, open to possible revision. It is this sense of “not wholly positive” that Hegel is trying to find a way to express.

In a passage from the “Berlin Phenomenology” (the section on phenomenology from the Berlin Encyclopedia), the connection between the phenomenological point and the logical structure of judgment is clear, even if the exact meaning of that connection is not.

The I is now this subjectivity, this infinite relation to itself, but therein, namely in this subjectivity, lies its negative relation to itself, diremption, differentiation, judgment. The I judges, and this constitutes it as consciousness; it repels itself from itself; this is a logical determination. (BPhG 2)3

And in being an agent, I am not simply causally responsive to inclinations and desires; there is no “fullness of positive being” here either. I interrupt or negate merely positive being (what I feel inclined to do, experience as wanting to do) by deliberating and resolving what to do. In Kantian terms, this means that any such inclination cannot count as a reason for an action except as “incorporated” within a maxim, a general policy one has for actions of such a type. So when Hegel reminds us in the preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit that we must think “substance” “also as subject,” he does not, it would appear, mean for us to think subject merely as an attribute of substance or an appearance of what remains, basically, substance, or an epiphenomenon of substance. The whole point of speculative idealism is to think substance as not-just-substance (or what I have been speculatively calling “the fullness of positive being”), and so as the negation of mere substance as such; and also to think subject as substance, what is not-mere-subject (which would be the Fichte option). A tall order. As noted before, the closest first and general approximation of what he means is Aristotelian: subjectivity (thinking and acting according to norms) is the distinct being-at-work (energeia, Hegelian Wirklichkeit) of the biological life-form that is the human, reason-responsive substance; this in the same sense in which Aristotle says, if the eye were body, seeing would be its form, its distinctive being at work. So should we understand the being-at-work Hegel calls “subject.” But this gets us only so far, and we need to see more of his detailed treatment of the problem in logical terms.

Synthesis and Ur-teilen
In order to have some broad overview of what Hegel is trying to say, we have to imagine in a kind of pictorial way how Hegel is inverting (what he takes to be) Kant’s basic model of what I have been loosely calling “rendering intelligible.” Instead of thinking of the fundamental act of understanding as a synthesis of independent, originally unrelated elements, either by subsuming an individual under a concept, or by including one concept under another, we should understand ourselves, both in experience and in logical reflection, beginning with “wholes,” never with experiential or logical subsentential simples or atoms.4 We begin with an original and internally complex unity of some sort, which must be articulated, differentiated, to be intelligible, but that articulation loses, cannot fully express in predicative terms, the original but inarticulate unity, which must be restored (“the judgment is the original division [Teilung] of what is originally one” [12.55]).5

This partly explains why the beginning of the SL looks as it does, the maximally indeterminate, all-comprehensive, and all-inclusive unity (of anything at all), Being, to be determined by a “negation” of such indeterminacy (something that, given Being’s indeterminateness, will not be possible).6 The project in the logic of being is to explore the conceptual capacities necessary to render determinate individuals intelligible in their individuality. Determinate being (Dasein) is (or let us assume now, for the sake of argument, that Hegel has shown it to be) the necessary negation (or further determination) of mere indeterminacy (Sein), and determinate being is determinate by virtue of a particular form of negation, which Hegel calls Anderssein, being-other, or by virtue of contrastive relations with other individuals or other concepts.7 These contrasts are made by virtue of both “qualitative” and “quantitative” predicates, and by the “measuring” of quantities in a way that reveals their relation to qualitative discrimination. As we shall see, there is no real explanation (within the assumptions of a logic of being) of why a thing has these properties, which it cannot lose without ceasing to be that thing, and so no account of any relation between the individual and its manifold properties. (The situation here is similar to the one that arises between the chapter on perception and the chapter on the understanding in the PhG.) And that will require a “movement” to the logic of essence, in which a thing is not negatively contrasted with other things, or its logical contraries, but is said to be self-negating. An essence is other than (“not”) its mere appearances, but must show itself in, is determinate only by reference to, its appearances (which are after all its appearances, not “indifferent” to it).8 Hegel calls the logic of essence “pure negativity” (reine Negativität).

Negation and Freedom
We have already seen that in the EL, Hegel contrasted his approach with traditional metaphysics by claiming that that enterprise was naïve in not appreciating what his Logic would: the “the antithesis of thinking within and against itself” (des Gegensatzes des Denkens in und gegen sich [EL §26]).9 Thought’s antithesis within and against itself amounts to this “movement of the concept,” that is, what we need to understand to understand how the Logic “moves” or, in some sort of inferential, nondeductive way, gets us from point A to point B.10 And such negativity amounts to “the innermost source of all activity,” the activity being “spiritual self-movement,” and this in a way that will help us understand the sublation of any opposition between concept and reality. That all sets quite a task. The interpretive claim so far has been that, for Hegel, to understand anything “in its truth” is to understand its determinability as just what it is and nothing else, or it is to understand it in the light of its distinctly possible intelligibility, in the light of its concept (its “actuality”). But any such finite concept is also a manifestation of conceptuality itself (of the possibility of conceptual content), and we would not ultimately have understood the determinacy of the thing were we not able to understand such conceptuality, the necessary elements (or “moments”) of any such possible conceptuality. That latter point of view is the SL’s, and Hegel now stakes virtually everything on the self-determining (“spiritual self-movement”) character of the exposition of such moments, and the engine of that movement is supposed to be a special form of negation, “dialectical” negation.

But the following passage, from the discussion of “the Absolute Idea” at the culmination of the argument of the SL, is only the beginning of an extraordinary set of claims that build on this notion of negation, to which we shall have to return in detail. For we also need at least to have in mind the way the remarks suddenly explode into a sweeping generalization, for which, I would contend, we do not yet have available in the commentaries even possible lines of interpretation.11

Besides the very general point about the “negative” status of judgment itself as a capacity (its not being merely a state we come to be in), and the point about predication/determination as negation (Spinoza’s “omnis determinatio est negatio,” as at SL 21.101), Hegel also introduces the claim that conceptual content itself must be understood as the capacity to use the concept appropriately as the predicate of possible judgments, and, as we see the Logic unfold, we see that that especially means to understand what is determinately excluded or negated by such a concept. As he goes on to sketch the most important element of negation in the book, he claims that this “first” act of negation referred to in the 12.246 passage—that a moment of the concept’s self-determination depends on a relation to and opposition with its contrary—requires that it must itself be negated, because it involves a kind of “contradiction” (which we have to investigate) that cannot stand, on pain of inconsistency, and that must itself be negated. (Or, the original indeterminate unity must somehow be restored as determinate.) This “negation of negation” is what prompts the ambitious, sweeping claim:

The second negative at which we have arrived, the negative of the negative, is this sublating of contradiction, and it too, just like contradiction, is not an act of external reflection; for it is on the contrary the innermost, objective moment of the life of spirit by virtue of which a subject is a person, is free. (12.246)

Hegel has clearly not called this self-movement of the concept subjectivity in an idle way, and in the context of the passage he clearly does not mean any divine or cosmic subjectivity (nor, as always, is he referring to a psychological subjectivity). He says he is talking about the logical status, persons. In the same way that judging, insofar as it is genuine, holds open the possibility of its negation or disconfirmation, just by being judging, not by virtue of any second, reflective act (all as opposed to its being subject to a later matter-of-fact positive counterdetermination), a deliberation about action, if it is to be a deliberation, is open to the force of reasons the agent has already accepted by deliberating at all, a possibility criterial for his acting at all. It is metaphorical to suggest that there is some ontological realm of “not merely positive being,” and commentators have sometimes been misled by Hegel’s substantivizations and nominalizations, but he is insisting on the logical or categorical requirements of the normative, and in that sense (the sense in which freedom is normatively constrained judgment and rational action), the negative (here only the possibility of not doing what I am powerfully inclined to do) is “that by which a person is free.” (And he does not mean any uncaused causality, but what counts to the subject as a reason.)

This is not to say that there is not a logical dimension to this problem that we will have to consider. This emerges most clearly in the Philosophy of Spirit at §382, when Hegel asserts that “The essence of Geist is formally therefore freedom,” and the appositive for that loaded term, freedom, is “the absolute negativity of the Concept as identical with itself.” (This is another passage where Hegel shows he can turn a phrase. He quotes Jesus as having said, “the truth makes spirit free,” and he himself adds, “freedom makes it [Geist] true,” where he means what it truly is to be Geist, realized fully as what it is.)

Moreover, in the light of everything we have seen thus far, it should not come as a surprise that shortly after this passage Hegel also yet again praises Kant for having partly understood (without having been able to think it all the way through) that this structure of basic conceptuality (concept, opposition, negation of negation) or this “triplicity” (as Hegel calls it) is the Ur-structure of all conceptual determinacy. He is referring first to Kant’s unexplored claim in the table of categories that a systematic derivation of the table is possible “from a common principle, namely the faculty for judging.” And second, he is referring to Kant’s claim that in each group of three, “the combination of the first and second in order to bring forth the third concept requires a special act of the understanding, which is not identical with that act performed in the first and second” (CPR B111). Hegel has the same ambitions, and clearly considers Kant not to have made good on these promises. (In the EL §§79–82, these are said to be three moments of “the logical,” three modalities of sense-making: the understanding, dialectic [or first negation], and the speculative [the negation of negation].)

The claim that all of this has to do with the theme of freedom clearly has something to do with what we called, in chapter 1, the “self-authorization” of reason, and is here signaled by references to self-determination and self-movement (that is, to the Fichtean idea that the only possible “determination” of thought is by thought),12 but that still leaves many questions unanswered. And it clearly bears an important relation to Kant’s famous formulation in the Groundwork:

Hence the will is not merely subject to the law but subject to it in such a way that it must be viewed as also giving the law to itself [selbstgesetzgebend], and just because of this as first subject to the law (of which it can regard itself as the author).13

In terms of the structure of the Logic, what Hegel will want to argue is that we cannot adequately explain freedom if we consider just a determinate property that some beings happen to have (as in a logic of being), and we cannot explain it either as a kind of essential ideal, manifest in but never adequately expressed in its appearances, in concrete individual actions (as in the logic of essence). We need the logic of the Concept, in which concepts are said to “give themselves their own content” and be “self-determining” in a way indebted to this Kantian claim on self-legislation, a claim that we should interpret in the way suggested in chapter 2. Any philosophical determination of actuality must be understood as “self-legislating” in the broad sense suggested there: reason relies only on itself in determining such a normative structure. These are not empirical questions. There is no flash of an “essence intuition” (Wesenschau) giving access to a world of abstract immaterial objects, essences.

Finally, once we understand this link between thinking and “negating,” we are prepared to understand, or at least to begin to understand, the most difficult and important distinction in a speculative logic according to Hegel. For the heart of that enterprise, the account of, the logic of, pure thinking, understood properly as pure spontaneity, and “as metaphysics,” is the idea of its self-determination of its own moments. If it is possible for pure thinking to determine what is necessary, what the necessary moments are, of any thinking about what is other than thinking, objects, then we will have to say that any such positing of any such moment, “finitude,” say, in its opposition to infinity, is itself a “negating,” a negating of some sort of indeterminacy in a prior moment, and—and here is the crucial but most difficult part—such a negating must be said to negate itself. In the course of its exposition of itself, it requires of itself what it cannot provide. Such a conception of finitude as the mere other of infinity cannot be defended without self-contradiction, and the duality must be rethought in the section Hegel calls Für-sich-sein, being-for-itself. Darstellung turns out to be Kritik, in Theunissen’s terms. Since what is negated in such a self-negation is itself a negating, we have something quite different from a negating of some positing, or sentence or predicate negating. We have what has been called “autonomous negation,”14 negation negating itself in a way that has a positive determination and requires a new Darstellung.

It could help demystify a bit the strange notion of autonomous self-negation, a negating that negates itself, if we recall, first, that Hegel’s Logic takes its bearings from a term or concept logic, but that he takes concepts as having content in being predicates of possible judgments. In effect, the content of each pure concept is articulable only in the judgments in which it is predicable. Concepts can be said to imply, to contain implicitly, various judgmental positions and to exclude others. And second, we can recall Kant on antinomial concepts as a guide for Hegel’s autonomous negation. That is, according to Kant, the concept of the smallest possible particle of matter or a temporal beginning of time requires, when its judgmental structure is exfoliated, the concept of a still smaller particle or a beginning prior to the beginning, that is, requires the infinite divisibility of matter, a concept that, when likewise articulated, requires for its sense in turn a smallest possible particle. The concept “negates itself”—the first self-negation. Each such pure concept must also be the contrary of itself, as Kant shows in his “dialectical” reasoning. They cannot both be true at the same time, although they can both be false. (The third antinomy revolves around subcontraries, which can both be true but cannot both be false together.) But this situation must itself be negated or the concepts could not be said to have any content, which they clearly do. Kant does this by claiming that “transcendental idealism” is what Hegel would consider the “sublation” or Aufhebung of the opposition. The details are complicated, but what we need here is just the general notion of a self-undermining concept, the results of which self-undermining can be understood to “negate their own negation”; the concept’s self-explication negates its own negation of itself. In the case of subcontraries, the appearance of self-negation, of the contrariness of the moments of the concept, can itself be negated, rendered not contrary, by transcendental idealism. Such idealism shows how both could be true, but not both false. We will see this notion at work soon in the logic of being. The concept of the general object of judgment, a knowledge claim, is introduced as “being”; or, we begin with the “thought of anything at all.” But as we saw from chapter 3, any such conceiving is conscious of its conceiving, and that means also conscious that it has conceived nothing at all, Nichts. The Kantian language would be: the thought must be a discursive thought, a synthesis. So the first moment is a denial of any intellectual immediacy; thinking must be discursive to be thinking. We find that out by trying to assume otherwise, just the dialectic or apogogic procedure Kant uses in the Antinomies. In Hegel’s treatment, the negation of this negation is the first real moment of determinacy of conceptual content, Dasein, or determinate being. More fully said: a concept so introduced is self-negating; and we need to “negate that negation” so as to negate the indeterminacy of the mere concept of anything at all. We need something that is what it is by not being what it is not, or Werden, becoming. When so self-consciously formulated we have the concept of Dasein, determinate being.15

This way of looking at conceptual “movement” is quite an important structural element in Hegel’s account of the history of art or the history of religion or the history of philosophy or the history of “world history” or of politics. It would mean getting lost in the Hegelian weeds to go too far into this in this context, but we can note that when Hegel explains any moment of “progress” in such a narration, say, the elimination of slavery, and he confronts the objection any radically historical account faces—slavery may have been acceptable for the Romans by their lights, but it was nevertheless wrong, always was, is, always will be—the interesting answer he gives is in line with the structure above. It was actually wrong by their lights, implicitly, and they struggled to find ways to avoid acknowledging this, a struggle that makes sense only if there was such an intimation of its wrongness. (And so herewith the weeds: we would need to discuss the possibility of collective self-deceit to go into this in any detail, which is just what Hegel does.)16 But his point is that the Romans’ negation of the situation of natural human equality also leads to a negation of that negation, in that it contravenes their own conception of law and its conditions, and that alone requires a new negation/position.17

So while it is not the most felicitous of expressions—autonomous negation, or the negation of a negation—a great deal in Hegel’s whole project rests on the idea behind it.

Logical Movement
I have suggested that the notion of logical “progress” in the SL, with that book understood as an account of the necessary elements in sense making or account giving just as such, amounts to a more and more satisfactory exposition of the determinacy of the conceptual resources necessary to provide any such account. This means that there is a basic kind of argument in the demonstration of such determinacy, so that while the three different “logics” differ, they nevertheless share enough features for it to be reasonable to speak of something like a “dialectical” method throughout. That process or argument or method involves some relation between what Hegel calls the self-relatedness or Selbstbeziehung, sometimes called the “identity,” of some sort of conceptual content involved in the determination in question, and the internal “negation” of that self-sufficiency (the exposition of the dependence of that determinacy on a contrastive relation with contraries or some other sort of contrast or opposition, such as with appearances, or with what Hegel calls being in-and-for-itself), and then the successful negation of that negation.18

In this still vague picture of indeterminate unity and the determinate negation of that unity, we noted that Hegel clearly wants to claim that any such “first” determination must also be seen to be of some logically problematic status. We do not yet know what sort, and why he wants to claim it. We have suggested that in the logic of being it has something to do with the relation between a concept’s “internal” determinacy and its external dependency on exclusion relations with contraries. This results in the contrasts we need—say, between the concepts of the one and the many in the logic of quality, or continuity and discreteness in the logic of quantities—both contrasts being required but, at least under the assumptions of the logic of being, not being successfully makeable. The concepts need to be contrastive, but each also seems a “moment” of the intelligibility of the other. (Continuity has to be the continuity of discrete moments; discreteness of a singular substance occurs only within continuities; all of which is crucial for the way Hegel thinks of the Kantian antinomies.) Hence we get that unusual claim in the quotation above, that negation (contrastive differentiation) must itself be negated. The original negation, say, between continuity and discreteness, is inadequate as a simple negation (each is not what the other is), and so that understanding of negation, as simply opposed, must be negated. Or with respect to the logic of being as a whole, the model of negation, the “negative” relation in general between an individual and the determinations by virtue of which it is contrasted with what it is not, must itself be negated, not stand as it is, must be rethought. This turns out to mean we need a different account, with a different logic, an account of the relation between a thing understood as a substrate, or an “essence,” and its “appearances.” In contrast to what happens in Kant, that essence cannot be unknowable (a mere thing in itself) without a collapse of the position back into mere indeterminacy. Here determinate intelligibility is not a function of relation to others, but now a “self-relation” between essence and its appearances, how it “shows” or manifests itself. All of these appearances are not what an essence “essentially” is, and yet, if Hegel is right that “essence must appear” in order to be determined as what it is, then that negation (appearances that are not essence) must be “negated” and essence understood in its own possibility, in terms of its basic “concept,” but in a way not indifferent to its appearances.

This summarizes hundreds of pages, but the important point for now is that we recall that any such determining is an apperceptive attempt at predication/determination, and so any such determination is always subject to a reflective assessment of whether the content has in fact been determined. That is the main point that we need. It is why negation (he might have just said “self-consciousness” or apperception) is said to be “the energy of thought, of the pure I.” Every determination of every sort of content in the Logic is a negation of some insufficient determinacy that must be able to be conceived positively (as the negation of the negation) for the determination to be intelligible. That consideration is available at every moment of the Logic because we are investigating putative roles in judgment that are assigned, when they are, self-consciously. In the beginning of the logic of being the attempted determination (by means of contrastive relations with other individuals) has not succeeded, we find, and we are off to the races that will lead us to that similar position/negation/negation-of-negation triplicity.

So reflection on what it would be to render anything determinately intelligible, or as Kant said, reflection on the concept of judgment itself, is supposed to be in this way contentfully manifold about the necessary moments in any acts of determination. The indeterminacy of the mere concept of judgment must be negated, its categorical moments specified. But that negation of indeterminacy, the manifold table of categories, must itself be negated as a mere manifold, and the connection with judgment as such must be specified according to a principle. So the Metaphysical Deduction can stand as one good example of how Hegel wants to understand internal negation. Of course, the idea of getting that much content out of that spare a beginning is staggering, but the entirety of the SL proceeds from just such a structured movement in the negation of the first indeterminacy in the book, Being.

Negation and Speculative Truth
We can approach the topic a different way by recalling Hegel’s distinction between something like ordinary truth, or correctness (as when I say it is raining outside and it is), and speculative truth, which in the broadest sense he defines not as the “concept’s agreeing with reality,” but as its “agreeing with itself.” (An example would be: essence “must show [scheinen] itself, that it is and is not its appearances.”) Another example would be a “true house,” one that best does what a house is supposed to do, and Hegel gives other examples, like a “true friend.” This refers to the so-called “ontological” conception of truth, not the correspondence or coherence theory. What is important here is the very general model it gives us for understanding the role of “negation” in speculative philosophy. This involves two senses of a thing’s being what it is and also not what it is. The first is the familiar way a decrepit horse could be said to be a horse, but not a true horse, not “really” what a horse should be. In just this sense, with any of the conceptual determinations of the logic of being for example, each determination is just that determination and not some other, as with the concepts, for example, of “finitude” or “discreteness.” What Hegel wants to show is that, within the resources of a logic of being, finitude, say, cannot be conceptually determined (its content specified) in isolation as just, determinately, finitude alone. It is finitude, but not all that finitude must be said to be, in order to be successfully determined as just that.19 Its concept does not agree with itself.

We will be able to understand this better once we have looked at what occurs “on the way” to speculative judgments (or “judgments of necessity”), that is, reflective judgments at home in the logic of essence. These are not judgments like “this is a horse” or “most swans are white,” but like (to use Hegel’s examples in the Encyclopedia) “this plant is curative” (it does not just happen to be curative but is so, qua the kind of thing it is); or “this instrument is useful” (does what the instrument is to do, agrees with its concept); or “that form of punishment is a deterrent” (it does what punishment is supposed to do). As we shall see, evaluative judgments, like “this action is good” or our familiar “this is a bad house,” will be paradigmatic examples of judgments in the logic of the Concept. They do not qualitatively specify a thing by distinguishing it from other things; they do not identify the appearances that show the “essence” of the thing; they understand the content “in terms of its concept.” (Again, the Logic is concerned not with these judgments per se, but with the metaconceptual conditions of their possibility, the reliance in them on qualitative negation, finitude, essence, appearance, universal, and this is the subject matter of the SL.)

What is especially important and difficult is why he thinks a typical determination in the logic of being, qualitative determination as in the examples above, does not adequately determine the thing’s being what it is, why even essential predication (“wolves hunt in packs” as opposed to “some wolves are gray”) also does not adequately determine the thing, but “this house is a good house” or “this punishment is a deterrent” (or, presumably, “this is a fine wolf”) does successfully determine. What is difficult is seeing the continuity and so the increasing adequacy in this supposed series, rather than three different sorts of determining predication.

In line with this, there is an even more general sense in which the invocation of negation is relevant. For each conceptual determination invokes a certain understanding of conceptual determinacy at some stage in the logic. (In the logic of being, it is a concept’s contrary understood as its “other,” what it is related to, distinguished from, as Hegel says, “externally.”) But any such understanding of a concept, while it is an understanding of conceptual determinacy, also is not such an understanding, because it does not involve what “a concept (or capacity for conceptual determination) really is,” something available to the Logic only at its end.

Negation and Contradiction
Everything is inherently contradictory. (Alle Dinge sind an sich selbst widersprechend.) (SL 11. 287)

Contradiction is the root of all movement [Bewegung] and vitality [Lebendigkeit]; it is only in so far as something has a contradiction within it that it moves, has an urge [Trieb] and activity [Tätigkeit]. (Ibid.)

The determination just discussed produces this negative consequence because finitude is conceived by abstract contrast with its contrary, the nonfinite or infinity, under the assumption that it is by being finitude, just that concept, marked off as such, that it excludes or opposes what is nonfinite, the infinite. But, or so we are supposed to acknowledge, this negative determination is essential to the determinacy necessary to set apart and delimit finitude in the first place. (There would be nothing to negate otherwise, and if there were, the negation would be, in Hegel’s terms, “external,” not constitutive of the thing’s determinacy.)20 So in a general sense, one has to say that a thing, in this case a basic concept or category, “includes” its contrary, or more precisely its relation to its contrary, in order to be, and be known to be, what it is. Neither of these “moments” of negation involves contradiction in the Aristotelian sense because “is” and “is not,” while said of the same thing and at the same time, are not meant in the same sense. But Hegel wants for various reasons to call such an analyzed state a “contradiction,” and there is some ground in the use of that term for saying that.21 (This is so, even though, if Hegel were more careful about his terminology, contradiction as such would be limited to a “determination of reflection” in the logic of essence. Unresolved “oppositions” in the logic of being involve an unresolved inconsistency between independent self-sufficiency and dependence on contrasts with a thing’s complement.)22 As Michael Wolff points out, in many contexts we are comfortable enough with the so-called “existence” of contradictions. We also say such things as that a man “contradicts” himself, or a claim “is contradicted” by reality, or that there are “performative contradictions,” and it is in this broader sense that Hegel calls these results “contradictory.”23 The more technical, “reflective” sense emerges later in the logic of essence. An attempt to determine a concept’s content under certain assumptions about determinacy succeeds only by contradicting (not being consistently tenable at the same time as) such assumptions, and so the assumptions must be revised. In the simplest sense, personifying the process, what someone intends to say, means to say, can be “contradicted” by what is actually said, what he finds he has to or can say.24 Hegel himself adverts to this way of understanding the self-negating development of the Logic at the very end, when he is presenting a recollective account of his own method, and he notes that the abstract treatment of its universal moments is due to the “mere opinion” (Meinen) or lack of awareness (Bewußtseinslosigkeit) of what it is actually treating (12.240).25 It cannot say what it means to say. As R. Bubner puts it, it is the lack of concord between the mode of exposition (Darstellung) and what is to be made intelligible (die Sache) that accounts for the “processuality of the Logic.”26

In fact, associating what Hegel is up to with a fairly ordinary sense of practical contradiction is evoked by Hegel at the beginning of the Logic when he is trying to explain the radicality of the initial moment of pure indeterminacy and immediacy:

But if no presupposition is to be made, if the beginning is itself to be taken immediately, then the only determination of this beginning is that it is to be the beginning of logic, of thought as such. There is only present [vorhanden] the resolve [Entschluß], which can also be viewed as arbitrary [Willkühr], of considering [betrachten] thinking as such. (21.56)27

What one has, in this highly hypothetical sense, “resolved” to do (consider pure thinking as such), when measured by what one has succeeded (or rather not succeeded) in doing, gives us an initial sense of the role of the negative. It is all still somewhat figurative, but it is, I want to suggest, interpretively on the right track.

At a more abstract level, Hegel tries to offer a general account of why this should happen, and that generally has to do with the inseparability of “position” and “negation” in determination.28 This basic and straightforward logical idea of thought’s “opposition” with itself invoked in this way by Hegel is fairly straightforward (as when what we do to specify the content of a concept ends up failing, not so specifying; we have contradicted what we set out to do), but he eventually makes a great deal out of it. The most simple or even trivial version of the idea is just that if, say, nothing living ever died, the notion of anything living would be empty. (The content of the concept of something living is such a content only in such an opposition.) If nothing were ever at rest and everything were always moving, the notion of motion could actually get no grip. If there were nothing lamentable, there would be nothing laudable. In his most speculative example: if everything were just what it is and nothing else (“no entity without identity”), then the notion of identity itself would have no content. Determinate identity requires some sort of self-differentiation to be intelligible as contentful identity. Otherwise, we would not be able to understand the difference (as we must) between “A” and “A = A.” So anything’s determination is at the same time, just thereby, also a determinate exclusion, and only by that exclusion can it determine. And this is true the other way around too. The soul’s not being mortal does not determine anything if it just excludes the ascribability of that predicate, and so says that what the soul is is “somewhere else” in logical space, anywhere else but in the “mortal space.” By this determination we know that the soul is nonmortal or that it is immortal, is something that lives forever. This is the reasoning that led Kant to include under qualitative determination not just predicate negation but something like term or contrary negation, “infinite” judgments in the table of the functions of judgment, or qualitative “limitation” in the table of categories.29

A somewhat broader way of putting the point is the following. I have said that Hegel’s speculative notion of negation is not predicate or sentence negation, an operator applied to a predicate or a sentence, but a self-negation. In these terms, he means to focus attention on concept negation, and it is in this sense that we can understand autonomous self-negation. The easiest way to understand this, and it is a reference Hegel will enthusiastically use, is again to think of Kant’s notion of concepts that are inherently antinomial, that is self-negating. He means concepts like the concept of the smallest material element of a material body, or the concept of the infinite divisibility of a material body, or the concept of a world beginning in time, or of having always existed, or the concept of an uncaused cause, and so forth. Now concepts, understood as rules, have content by being understood to have the content they have. To understand a rule is to know how to use it, and in using it, to know one is following it. If we do not understand it this way, we cannot distinguish between mere regularity and rule-following. So understanding such a concept, viz., the concept of a smallest particle of matter, is not, as we have been insisting throughout “grasping a content” but understanding what the rule instructs us to think. That is, the concept is always already a “moment” of a discursive activity, a thinking through of its implications. And such a thinking through ends in the concept’s negating itself, as in the unavoidability of concluding that there is always a smaller particle, for example, following Kant’s account in the antinomies, because the thinking of a smallest particle requires us, instructs us, to think of continuing divisibility. In this sense, the concept negates itself; such negation is autonomous, that is, autonomous to the concept itself, not negated by some other concept or consideration. And just like Hegel, Kant insists on an internal negation of that negation, both for concepts and the negative of those concepts that cannot both be true together but can both be false together (“contraries” in the Aristotelian square), and for those that can both be true together but cannot both be false (“subcontraries”). Hegel does not agree with the way Kant wants to effect this negation of negation, by introducing equivocation between phenomena and noumena, but the logical structure of speculative negation can be understood to follow this route: concept negation as autonomous self-negation, and negation of that negation so as to produce a concept under which can be understood the sublation of both the concept and its negation.30

It is in various ways by ignoring a dependence on contraries and exclusion and attending to concepts in isolation that all the basic concepts under consideration in the Logic (until the logic of the Concept itself) are shown to be antinomial in this sense, that the resolve to determine content in such isolation does not match the achievement, that the exposition fails to capture die Sache. Obviously what we need to see, though, is how Hegel proposes to show us the relationship between any internal “self-relation” (Selbstbeziehung) and what it determinately is not, and why, under what assumptions, this becomes a problem in identifying determinately any of the concepts under investigation.

This is all by way of introduction. The point of view is too high-altitude to get us very far. For example, without further elaboration of the point made above about determinate negation, it still seems that the basic model for the negation at issue is predicate or sentence negation, as if the determination in question is the assertion “The finite is not the infinite” or “It is not the case that the finite is the infinite.” As we shall see, this can be quite misleading.31 In addition, one tends to focus first on the first examples one comes across in the logic of being, and that can be misleading too.32

The issue of negation has a great deal of continuity, but it also changes in the logic of essence and the logic of the Concept. In keeping with his own association between general and transcendental logic, the considerations discussed so far should not be understood to be matters of formal clarity in a reflection on judgmental logic, as if confined to a clarification of the rules for “making sense of all sense-making.” As Hegel insisted, we are not studying how we think about (or talk about) matters (or even how we “must” think). The question is a question about “any possible intelligibility,” and so about being in its intelligibility, or as he puts it, die Sache, that issue, not “our ways” of rendering intelligible.

Or, to cite a briefer, clearer example of what Hegel considers too “abstract” a distinction between logical form and content, contradiction is supposed to be explicable “merely formally,” as a matter of general logic, as Kant understands that domain. In Kant’s various explanations, it comes down to ~(p & ~p). Or, to state it in its predicative form, ~((S is P) & (S is ~P)). But to revert to our discussion above (and this is the source of one of Hegel’s most enthusiastic compliments to Kant), Kant himself showed in the mathematical antinomies that what looks formally to be (what, in fact, formally is) a contradiction, p and ~p, need not be, not if we understand properly the connection between “the concept” and “the matter itself.”33 Again, if the sentences are “The world has a beginning in time” and “The world does not have a beginning in time,” then it is not the case that if one is true, its negation must be false, and vice versa. They can be, as in this case, contraries, not contradictories. They can both be false, as in Kant’s own examples to explain his position on the antinomies. In his examples, if the subject is what he calls the Weltall, the world-totality, then the disjunction “The world-totality moves” or the “The world-totality does not move” amounts to a statement of contraries and the law of the excluded middle does not apply, as in, even more simply, “The stone smells good” and “The stone does not smell good.”34 Stones don’t have odor; both judgments are false.35

But what would a nonformal conception of negation, one not restricted to the function of a logical constant, one that has some real philosophical work to do, amount to?

Negation as Material Incompatibility: Robert Brandom
Robert Brandom calls Hegel’s concept of determinate negation “Hegel’s most fundamental conceptual tool,” and he means throughout Hegel’s Logic, semantics and metaphysics. He defines such negation in terms of “material incompatibility,”36 and in a way deeply in tune with Hegel’s project, he insists that the general normativity of material inferences is irreducible to the normativity of formal principles alone (as in the point made in the example of “contradiction” just discussed in the previous section). It was suggested above that the most important of Hegel’s many uses of negation was the contrastive relation with what it is not, in the logic of being (and only under those assumptions) with its contraries or in the “dialectic” between self-sufficient determinacy and dependent determinacy. (Hegel remarks in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy that negativity is to be understood “not as change, nor yet as nullity, but as difference of determination.”)37 Brandom has given us a rich account of what that claim amounts to. But it is a limited one, and seeing those limitations will, I hope, illuminate something about Hegel’s full position. (This limitation is partly due to Brandom’s relying so much on the PhG, and it will help reveal something about the status of negation in the Logic.)38

Brandom’s central idea is that determinate negation is a modal issue, a matter of alethic modalities, concerned with material modalities in reality (a modal realism) of necessity, possibility, and impossibility. By “modal” Brandom means to point to the fact that theoretical cognition of the world, even empirical description, relies on words that are not mere descriptions, like laws that support robust counterfactual inferences, necessitation, preclusion, and that our descriptions, quoting Sellars, are only descriptions (and not “labels”) “in the space of implications.”39 Or:

For there to be some determinate way the world is just is for it to be articulated into states of affairs—objects possessing properties and standing in relations—that include and exclude each other in modally robust ways.40

The most manageable unit of intelligibility is the judgment, understood by Brandom as, au fond, a commitment. (He says judgments are “the smallest unit for which one can take cognitive responsibility.”)41 (He also says that his use of “commitment” tracks Hegel on “setzen.”)42 (Brandom’s full theory of intentionality is that it is functionalist, inferentialist, holist, normatively regulated, and socially pragmatist—far too much to consider here.)43 One important element in understanding the possible content of such a commitment is an understanding of conceptual content, the very problem we have been tracking in Hegel. And the most important element in the possibility of such content is that any entitled wielder of such a concept is just thereby (by having understood the content, come to possess the concept) extruding material incompatibilities and finding and endorsing (“extracting,” he sometimes says) further material commitments.

According to this conception, to be conceptually contentful is to stand in relations of material incompatibility (“determinate negation”) and material consequence (“mediation”) to other such contentful items.44 These incompatibilities are not modeled on predicate negation. Something’s being a square excludes its being an aspiration or an episode in the Civil War, but these are “indeterminate negations” and locate the subject in that infinite logical space not “filled” (in the early Wittgenstein’s model) with what is excluded, just somewhere else. (This is what traditional logic called an “infinite” judgment.) But that a square is not a circle (that its being a square “excludes” the possibility of its being a nonsquare), or that something cannot be red and green all over, or that Pittsburgh’s being west of Harrisburg and Harrisburg’s being west of Philadelphia means that Pittsburgh is west of Philadelphia, are all determinately informative, and the inferences are not formal-logical. (Red and square are different but compatible properties; square and circle are different but incompatible; two different kinds of differences.) These material incompatibilities and material consequences are normative requirements for understanding the content’s being the content it is. They have to do with the coherent thinking of these contents, but they involve no reference to the psychology of thinking. In a Fregean mode, one could say, as Brandom does, that thoughts stand in these relations, not psychological thinking events. Having noted that, when all goes well, what we know is what is the case, Brandom also notes that Hegel wants to understand what we should say about cases when all does not go well, or when we do not yet know how things are going. That is, in the Phenomenology, where the question is “how it is for the subject” when things are unsettled or error occurs, Hegel wants to discuss the relation between how things seem to be, or appearances, and how they are really (or between representings and the represented), and Brandom shows how Hegel can have a position on this that does not rely on Kant’s “confirmation” by extraconceptual intuitions. (He works out, in ways germane to the PhG but not in this context, how things can be said to be for-consciousness and to-consciousness.) As we shall see, the Logic’s notion of Schein is quite different, and raises some questions about the scope of Brandom’s approach.

But this all concerns not just thinking; facts or states of affairs stand to each other in these relations as well. The “logical” relations simply reflect the way the world is conceptually structured.45 (Another manifestation of the Hegelian understanding of the relation between logic and metaphysics.) So on the object side, we have alethic modal relations, and on the subjective side, we have deontic normative relations: what we ought to extrude, and what we ought to undertake. They are both “two sides of one coin.” More precisely formulated:

First, deontic normative vocabulary is a pragmatic metavocabulary for alethic modal vocabulary. Second, as a consequence, there is a kind of sense-dependence relation between these vocabularies.46

(The second formulation is something we saw and discussed in the second chapter.)

Now this sort of conceptual or modal realism is only one of a triplicity of general characterizations that Brandom thinks we have to understand together if we are to understand Hegel. I cannot go into them all and will concentrate on this modal realism, but the rest of the picture should be noted. There is first objective idealism, defined as “a symmetric sense dependence of the concepts articulating subjective processes of concept use and concepts articulating objective conceptual relations.” The modally real impossibilities and implications would still exist even if there were no subjects around, but the sense or meaning of these determinations depends on our way of identifying them, as the determinate meaning of a fact could be said to depend on the meaning of the content of an assertion, a particular on the behavior of singular terms, and so forth. And finally there is “conceptual idealism,” where Brandom’s pragmatic reading of Hegel begins to be more detectable.

This aspect arises with the question,

should this whole constellation of objective conceptual relations (the holistic structure we saw atomistically conceived sequentially as objects-and-properties, facts, and laws) and subjective conceptual practices and processes be understood in terms of the relational categories of objectivity or the practical-processual categories of subjectivity?47

The answer is the latter. These practical-purposive processes, the “instituting” processes of purposive action and intentional agency, have the priority raised as a question in what was just quoted. (This aspect of Brandom’s position is quite complicated, since it involves his reading of Hegel’s summative position in the Science of Logic, in which the Absolute Idea is the unity of the practical and theoretical idea. Since we lack a full discussion by Brandom of the Logic, I will rely later on Brandom’s article about logical and empirical concepts, which is too limited to permit us to broach the issue of the Absolute and Brandom’s reading of that issue.)

The way in which Brandom discusses the deontic normative relations side touches on the issue raised earlier about the mysterious talk of resolve and drive in the SL. A very attractive feature of Brandom’s approach is that this aspect is built into the theory of conceptual content itself. (Again, as throughout, we must think of these activities not as psychological events but as expressing the normative proprieties inherent in commitments as such.) He claims that Hegel is building on an idea of Kant’s:

The responsibility in question should be understood as a kind of task responsibility: it is the responsibility to do something. What one is responsible for doing in committing oneself to p is integrating that new commitment into the constellation of prior commitments, so as to sustain its exhibition of the kind of unity distinctive of apperception.48

The concept of negation (incompatibility) in terms of which we should understand determinateness (whether of subjective thought or of objective fact) essentially involves a principle of motion, of change, of active, practical doing—as odd as this seems from the point of view of the logical tradition indigenous to Verstand.49 (This is the beginning of a much longer topic, to be discussed at length in chapter 7.)

Brandom is basing his account on the introduction to the Phenomenology, but as his formulations indicate, he is proposing a general theory of Hegelian conceptual content on its basis.50 I noted in the previous chapter that this pragmatic gloss on apperception construes it as a subject’s reflective relation to the status of one’s own judgments, and that this is indeed an implication of Kant’s claim about the apperceptive character of consciousness and judgment, but it is a derivative one. A judgment qua judgment is, in the first place, “open” to such reflection because it is apperceptively affirmed, and this possibility (its “negative self-relation”) must be understood before what it makes possible—reflective integration in a network of commitments—is introduced. And in the Logic, speaking casually, something goes wrong at the outset in our attempt to follow through on what is introduced—the way we go about such discharging of commitments. We have no sense yet of any important limitation in the way “what we are supposed to do” in carrying out this commitment, if regulated by the assumptions of Verstand, should necessarily produce “thought’s opposition to itself.” Extruding incompatibilities is what one is obligated to do “whenever they arise.” We have no sense yet that, under certain inadequate presuppositions about how to do this, (i) they cannot but arise (and not merely as a vague result of our finitude)51 and (ii) we will end up intending to do something (extruding incompatibilities, say) that we will not initially, from within the conceptual point of view in question, know how to do. The “doing” that Brandom introduces also introduces the kind of practical contradiction we made room for above, but it does not yet connect with the more determinate account of the limitations in ways of rendering intelligible that Hegel is interested in in the SL.52

I have already argued that as long as we are clear that we are using notions like thinking, accepting, rejecting, extruding (incompatibilities), and extracting (commitments) not psychologically but as expressive of the normative requirements constitutive of conceptual content as such, we should accept the Logic’s own account of “movement,” “resolve,” and therewith “contradiction” in very much the spirit, at least, of Brandom’s enterprise. (Again, more on this in chapter 7.) His functionalist account of content spares us the prospect of a moving or self-transforming kind of (very strange) abstract object, the concept. Brandom thinks he has given us the resources to account for the “meta-conceptual categorical framework” of Vernunft, at the speculative level, as opposed to Verstand, and a key element of this claim is the understanding of negation, and so the concomitant commitment to this practical doing at the Vernunft level.

But cleaning up potential inconsistencies in the network of one’s commitments is quite a Verstand-like thing to do, and Verstand, anthropomorphizing a bit, is happy enough with activities or movements like inferring, concluding, presupposing.53 It is not as if Verstand just judges and Vernunft infers. As noted, the problem is that Verstand, at a level of metaconceptual, speculative abstraction, cannot do what must be done; let us say, for example, it contrasts the finite with the infinite (with, determinately, what it is not), or the one and the many, in a way that undermines the very contrast itself and so requires a “negation” of that notion of negation. And given the context of the Logic, the inevitability of contradiction cannot rest, as it does for Brandom, on “the conceptual inexhaustibility of sensuous immediacy.”54

In general, Brandom’s approach has the advantage of giving us a coherent way of understanding the position, clearly Hegel’s, that negation should not be understood as a mere logical operator. The world is “full of negation”; that is, in Brandom’s interpretation (and in his own view), objects and events stand in modally robust relations of exclusion and implication, all such that understanding the world imposes deontic normative requirements on anyone asserting anything about it. The limitations of the approach (or the reason for its merely introductory status), which Brandom admits, is that the position is oriented from “ground level” cases of, largely, matters of fact known empirically. There is nothing necessarily misleading about this. Hegel does the same thing, trying to exemplify points he is making about reality and negation, or something and other, or finite and infinite, by talking about meadows and ponds, the moon and the sun, “the logical significance of what people call ‘character’” (EL §90Z), and so forth. But there is a problem if we orient ourselves exclusively from this understanding when we move to the metaconceptual, speculative level. In Hegel’s case, those exemplifications just cited express a specific understanding of determinacy, largely what he calls qualitative determinacy, an understanding that persists throughout the explanation of quantitative and “measured” determinacy, that is, throughout the logic of being. So in the first place, this is a limited kind of negation (typical of the logic of being, what Hegel calls Anderssein), not all of what Hegel means by “the reality of negation” in its most general sense in the Logic. It is not what is at stake in the assumptions of a reflective approach to reality, one that seeks to fix essential identities (not just matter-of-fact determinacy, specified qualitatively), identities not available to observation and description, and to understand the uniquely negative relation between essence and appearance. Still less is it—this opposition between a thing and its contraries—suitable for the determination of an act as good, or of a house as good, or of “what goodness is” (or of what is “fully” or “really” a good act or a true house), and that opposition alone does not get us to the complicated status of negation in the unfolding of a logic of the Concept.

Partly this is a problem for Brandom because he has (so far) provided only a kind of one-size-fits-all account of determinate negation. This certainly does get at something quite important in Hegel, even though, as P. Redding has argued, it is more important to Hegel than to Brandom that material incompatibilities are to be understood in an “Aristotelian” way, that is, in terms of term logic.55 In this picture, individuals are always understood as instances of kinds, this-suches, and by virtue of that, are determinately excluded from their “complements” or contraries and just thereby determined. Horses are mammals, and so not nonmammals, that is, not birds, or reptiles, or amphibians, and so forth. They are the contraries of mammals, not just in the infinite logical space of all that is not mammalian, set by a negated predicate. (To make Brandom’s main point, it is important to say: they do not just also happen to lack the properties of birds, etc. By being mammals they cannot have the properties of birds, reptiles, etc.)56 Individuals are not arguments satisfying functions, but members of determinate kinds and intelligible by virtue of that and by virtue of what that determines by “negating,” excluding as impossible. What is important in the context of this discussion is not whether a more Fregean approach can handle such reliance on terms in its own way (which Brandom argues),57 but that a great deal changes when Hegel begins to consider individuals not as intelligible by virtue of kinds, but as appearances, the “ground” of which is unobserved, and ultimately relies for a proper account-giving of this ground relation on the notion of law. As Redding has also claimed, the character of determinate negation depends a good deal more on these very different contexts (the three “logics”) than Brandom’s modal realism can handle in Hegel.58

Secondly, the move from the ordinary to the speculative level—the metaconceptual structure of reason—alters the epistemology of negation understood as Brandom does. At the “ground level,” there is no serious epistemological problem involved in the determination of the content of “modally rich” descriptions of the world. It is a necessary element in understanding surface and red that a surface that is red all over excludes being green all over. And if a commitment to a claim happens to be incompatible with another commitment, then the question of how to resolve it is not epistemologically problematic. One has to give up either one or the other, resting on the best evidence or argument available, or successfully recategorize the concepts such that the contradiction disappears in a non-question-begging way. But at the metaconceptual level, the epistemology has to be quite different. Concepts like being, or becoming, or something, or manyness, or continuity, or infinity cannot of course be empirically based and must rather be understood in some progression of interdefinability. And that alters any possible understanding of the origin of the discovered incompatibilities. These cannot be due to our inability, as finite thinkers, to correctly anticipate all of the deontic requirements of any one commitment. Hegel is clearly trying to show that under some limited assumptions about the nature of determinacies, incompatibilities (and incompatibilities of a certain sort) are unavoidable and not a contingent matter of fact. The possibilities of resolution do not therefore involve assumptions like: “One or the other commitment must be in error. Which one should I give up?” Speculative negation of negation (aka “Aufhebung”) does not work that way. Said in its full Hegelian language, at the speculative level, the development of the concept is autonomous (not driven by the discovery of unexpected inconsistencies) and, much more importantly, self-negating.59 In Brandom’s account, however valuable it is, we do not have yet a sufficient explanation of the idea of logical “movement” (especially given that it is not driven in the SL by “consciousness’s” experience of incompatible commitments), or the appropriate logical understanding of this notion of “self-negation,” a notion most on view, as we shall see, in the logic of essence. So, for example, Hegel says, in the preface to the second edition of the Encyclopedia Logic:

With the absolute right of the freedom proper to it, this thinking stubbornly insists on reconciling itself with the sound content, but only insofar as this content has been able to give itself the form [Gestalt] most worthy of it: that of the concept and of necessity, which binds everything, content as well as thought, and precisely therein makes it free. (EL 20–21)

Accordingly, Brandom is right to claim something like this:

From Hegel’s point of view, that extrusion or expulsion of incompatible commitments and extraction of and expansion according to consequential commitments is the inhalation and exhalation, the breathing rhythm by which a rational subject lives and develops.60

But as stated, the claim is too restrictive. It ought to read “is a crucial element of the inhalation and exhalation, the breathing rhythm, etc.” There are two more “logics” to go.

So while Brandom’s account of modal realism is a compelling picture of what Hegel calls Anderssein and is appropriate for the logic of being and the consciousness chapters of the PhG, commitment to it will not allow the proper understanding of the relation between the categories of the Logic to one another and will lead one into a limited reading of the Phenomenology.

This allows a repetition and intensification of a claim about Brandom’s approach I made earlier. If we distinguish making the world explicit, rendering it intelligible, from making explicit these forms of making the world explicit, rendering intelligible ways of rendering intelligible, then the former depends on the latter, the latter constitutes the possibility of the former, not, as the Brandom passage just cited and others seem to suggest, the other way around, as if the task is clarifying what we have already done. (I mean: as if the development of logical concepts is somehow essentially postempirical, retrospectively trying to get clear what ways of mediating the immediate have become required, required by new empirical discoveries.)

This latter sounds like what Brandom means when he says,

In exercising a capacity, engendered by the use of his logical vocabulary, to say and think explicitly what one has all along implicitly been doing in saying and thinking anything at all—namely, determining content, incorporating immediacy in the form of mediation, by engaging in a process of concept-revision through experience—this is the sort of self-consciousness Hegel calls “Absolute Knowledge.”61

And when he says,

For the process recollected in the case of the logical concepts is not (in either of its versions) one of determination by incorporation of immediacy, as it is in the case of empirical concepts. In the logical case the transformative Erfahrung that is rehearsed in the two books is rather motivated wholly by considerations that show up retrospectively as having always already been implicit in the contents of the (meta)concepts already in play.62

What could it mean to say that Hegel develops these metaconceptual resources “out of the raw materials he inherited from the philosophical tradition”? There is no such reliance in the Logic, and the development in question is modeled, as we have been saying, on Kant’s Metaphysical Deduction: thought’s a priori and “productive” determination of its own possibility.

There are other passages in Brandom’s corpus like the ones just quoted, and they introduce another interesting wrinkle in his position. For example:

The Wiederholung presented in the Logic is substantially more retrospectively reconstructed, and hence more rational in the sense of more reason revealing, than is that of the Phenomenology. But for both, Hegel clearly believes that the only way to come to occupy the cognitive position he finally arrives at is by going through the conceptual process and progress to which the long expositions of those works are guides. It is no use jumping ahead to peek at the ending and see how the books come out.63

Exactly so, one wants to say, but this appears to be how Brandom thinks Hegel thinks of his own position, in contrast to how Brandom thinks of it. For he also writes, in contrast with this “no peeking” passage,

For we can start with a pragmatic metalanguage, in which we describe the practices that confer and determine conceptual content, and specify in those terms what it is that a particular logical locution makes explicit, introducing it as expressing those features. This is, not by coincidence, the path I pursue in Making It Explicit. I think it is possible in principle to say how we should think about discursive practice according to the conceptual scheme in place at the end of the Phenomenology and the Science of Logic, without having to rehearse the expository paths by which Hegel develops that scheme for us.64

I am suggesting that how Hegel thinks of his own position is how we should think of it. Without such a picture, incompatible commitments generated at the empirical level will look like the engine driving the whole pulsating self-negating process, and the status of the Logic and logical movement will look confusing.

Finally, there is one other attempt to differentiate Hegel’s treatment of negation from a formal treatment of the logical operator, to understand the reality of negation and so the reality of dialectic, and we should review that briefly before moving on to examples at work in the logic of being.

Real Opposition
We are investigating the forms of negation Hegel claims to be assumed in the possibility of determinate intelligibility in different contexts, under different assumptions about determinacy. This is just a first pass at familiarizing ourselves with the topic. It will recur in different forms constantly throughout. Summarized very crudely, these “kinds” of determinacy are expressed in assertions like, first, “Socrates is white,” or “Rosie is a dog,” or “Copper is an electricity conductor”; second, in assertions like “Such a plant is curative,” “That punishment is effective,” or “Wolves hunt in packs”; and third, in what Hegel takes to be proper “judgments,” like “That is a good house,” or “That is bad for horses,” or “That action is good.” (These distinctions assume the most important general claim made in the Logic, a claim that has already surfaced often. It is the claim about the “logical differences”—that is, the differences between the different modalities of judgment, different forms of thought—between the intelligibility of atomic particulars in their qualitative and quantitative distinctness, particulars as appearances of essence, and particulars judged “according to their concept.”)65

Various higher-order concepts are said by Hegel to be presupposed in such possible determinations, ranging from “finitude” to “essence” and “law,” to “universality,” “life,” and even “method.” None of these concepts can be understood to be derived empirically; they are presupposed in any empirical determination (in different ways, in the different contexts), and their content is a matter of both “internal,” self-related “moments” and “external” dependence on relations to contrary or otherwise “negative” “moments.”

The content of a true assertion is what is the case, and so these constitutive moments of any possible intelligible assertion are the “forms of reality.” Any assertable claim (of various sorts) must be an expression of such conceptual specifications of intelligibility, and these intelligibility conditions constitute the possibility of intelligible bearers of truth (judgments). The forms of intelligibility are the forms of what could be true, although they do not settle the question of what, in particular, is true. What we want to know is both something about the material relations of exclusion necessary to differentiate and render contentful these higher-order concepts, and why there should be some inherent problem, some unavoidable inconsistency or antinomy, under the specific assumptions of each “logic,” in specifying those internal and external relations.

Skepticism about such an approach is easy to understand. If the above is an adequate gloss on the claims we started with in chapter 2 (“being is known to be in itself a pure concept and the pure concept to be true being”), then we seem to be saying that these modally real relations of negation, however many kinds there are, do not depend for their reality on negators, excluders, claim makers. What we do in avoiding inconsistencies and what “the world does” in excluding incompatibilities are two sides of the same coin. The “status” of such modalities is not wholly confined within what we do to differentiate, discriminate, infer. They exist as what Brandom calls “claimables” even if we imagine a world without any claimings.66 It could look as if we are close to positing something like negative facts, which some have seen to be required in order to explain the possibility of the intelligibility of the content of false assertions. It might seem that we are drawn into the reality of possible worlds (the world of “what could be claimed” even if there were no claimers) or at least an unjustified projection of the requirements of successful describing/explaining “onto” the world as it is in itself.

But it is completely foreign to Hegel’s approach (and what he thinks he has established in the Phenomenology) to entertain speculation and philosophically serious worries about the status of claimable truths even if there is no one around to claim them. That is like yearning for a view of the real world without our having to use our “instruments” to grasp it (thus grasping only what can be grasped by our instruments), or is close to the nearly mad fantasy of trying to know what the world would be like independent of our way of knowing it. Our way of knowing it is knowing it, knowing what is the case, or it is not knowledge. What could be known or not yet known does not have to “exist” in some way in order for us to understand how things can be the case without anyone available to claim it is the case. To project from the actual to an imagining of what can be said about what might be the case without anyone available to claim it is simply to imagine what it would be to claim it. This is no reason to worry that we are imagining it merely “for us,” by our lights alone, and so forth, not if it is knowledge we are imagining. Fear of error is the cause of error in this case, as Hegel has written in the introduction to the Phenomenology.67

But there is another way to understand the “reality of negative modalities,” and it too is suggested by Brandom. In a valuable passage from his first Munich lecture on Hegel, Brandom makes the following remark.

For objective properties, and so the facts concerning which objects exhibit which properties, also stand in relations of material incompatibility and consequence. Natural science, paradigmatically Newton’s physics, reveals objective properties and facts as standing to one another in lawful relations of exclusion and consequence. That two bodies subject to no other forces collide is materially (non-logically, because of laws of nature) incompatible with their accelerations not changing. That the acceleration of a massive object is changed has as a material consequence (lawfully necessitates) that a force has been applied to it. In the first case, the two ways the world could be do not just contrast with one another (differ). It is impossible—so Newtonian physics, not logic, tells us, hence physically impossible—that both should be facts. And in the second case it is physically necessary—a matter of the laws of physics—that if a fact of the first kind were to obtain, so would a fact of the second kind.68

The implication of this passage, and of all of Brandom’s emphases on modal realism, is that our first orientation in trying to understand Hegelian negation should be not the logical operation of predicate or sentence negation, but real opposition, for example, opposed magnitudes. This contravenes the familiar criticism that Hegel has confused logical negation with real opposition (on the contrary, he is aware of it and wants to concentrate on the conceptual counterpart of the latter), and it provides a good transition to one of the other (one of the only other) emphases on such material negation, the interpretation of Michael Wolff.69 For Wolff also thinks that the controversy in the eighteenth century about positive and negative magnitudes, especially as it surfaced in Kant, as well as the emerging clarity about negative numbers, played a far larger role in the development of Hegel’s thinking about negation and contradiction than did a reflection on the logic of the formal operator. In consonance with Brandom’s sentiment above, Wolff notes that even Hegel’s category of becoming, so important at the beginning of the logic of being, owes much to Hegel’s defense of Newton and the latter’s doctrine of the becoming equal of magnitudes (fieri aequales).70

Wolff’s main concern in his major book on the subject is with the status of contradiction in Hegel’s dialectical logic, clarified by its relation to Kant’s understanding of dialectic. Contradiction as such is a determination of reflection, a moment of the logic of essence, and we need more preparation for that context. We haven’t, for example, come close to the issue of the full and detailed status of the “negation of negation” in Hegel’s speculative logic.

But in keeping with the overview attempted here, there are a few general points that Wolff has made that are worth keeping in mind. The first major issue is the one we have been dealing with. Hegel treats contradiction and in general the status of negation and negativity as something real, not merely the result of a logical operation on a predicate or a proposition. In Wolff’s account, there are two important contexts for understanding how Hegel could claim such a thing.

First, we need to recall Kant’s differentiation between logical contradiction, dialectical contradiction (paradigmatically in the antinomies), and what Kant defended as real opposition (Entgegensetzung). Kant tried to define the first wholly in terms of his doctrine of analyticity, most evident in the example of affirming and denying the same thing of the same subject at the same time (or in terms of logically false assertions). Dialectical contradictions, however, were illusions, only apparent contradictions. This account is the one that obviously interested Hegel, especially with respect to his different view of the origin of the appearance of a contradiction. Kant argued that, in the case of the mathematical antinomies (the first two), a kind of category mistake about the subject of the antinomies—“the world,” that it is the sort of object that could have a beginning in time and limit in space, and a “complex substance,” that it is the sort of object that could consist of simple parts, or of infinitely divisible parts—masks the true resolution of the antinomies. This is that there is only an apparent contradiction. In reality, as noted previously, upon analysis the two theses are contraries, and thus can both be false (and they are), although not both true at the same time. The world cannot be said either to have a beginning or not; a complex substance cannot be said to be either composed of simples or infinitely divisible. In the case of the dynamical antinomies, upon proper reflection on the subject of the claim, we can discover an equivocation on whether that subject is understood as a thing in itself or as an appearance. Once that is clarified, we can see that the two of these are subcontraries, not contradictory; they cannot both be false, but they can both be true (and they are). In both cases, we get indirect proof of the truth of transcendental idealism.

The same sort of clarification of an illusory contradiction is found in the contemporary “dual aspect” interpretations of that idealism. According to this view of the passages that seem to support it,71 the position can seem committed to a contradiction. The same object considered from one point of view is capable of spontaneous causality and from another point of view is necessitated. This is only an apparent contradiction, presumably, once we know how to differentiate appearances and things in themselves as two different possible “aspects” (if we can). This is not the way Hegel will argue that freedom and necessity can be understood as complementary, not contradictory, but “reflective resolution” like this is on the agenda after Kant. (That is, there might be other “contextualizations” besides this one by virtue of which what appears as a contradiction can be shown not to be, especially other ways in which the “both true” strategy of the subcontraries can be used.)72

But also of importance for understanding the assumptions that go into Hegel’s approach according to Wolff is that Kant was an early defender of Newton on the relation of oppositions in nature, or of positive and negative magnitudes (from his early 1763 essay on the subject), and as the quotation from Brandom notes above, this is the link between Brandom’s modal realism and the historical context laid out in detail by Wolff. An object can be at rest because of the lack of a motive power, but it would be a mistake to think of all negative possibilities like this. It can also be at rest because of an opposing force equal to the thing’s motive force. Critics like Crusius were aghast at the idea of forces having positive and negative values.73 But Kant understood that such “values” (and here again an important precedent for Hegel) had those values in relation to each other, not absolutely, that they were relative values, arbitrarily reversible even. In the collision of two bodies, the acceleration of one will change by the measure of the force that opposes (“negates”) its motion. In the same sense, a hundred-dollar debt cannot be understood as just a lack of a hundred dollars. Many people lack a hundred dollars but are not in debt. The debt is a “negation” of, even in contradiction to, a credit of a hundred dollars.

Wolff also shows that developments in mathematics, of which Hegel was well aware, also contributed to Hegel’s reflections on the reality of negation. For mathematicians were just beginning to understand that negative numbers could not be understood on the model of subtraction, or, said in a Hegelian way, that there was something “positive” about negative numbers, apparent, say, in their sums. (The sum –4 + –5 = –9 cannot be accounted for if the negative sign is confined to subtraction. The notion of adding “subtracted quantities” makes no sense.)74

So in the sense in which we discussed, logical contraries as opposed to each other, not indifferent to each other (a horse’s being a mammal means not just that it lacks the properties of reptiles but that it cannot have them), the reality of such opposition, the impossibility of rendering intelligible, even just describing, without conceding that there is such a reality, can be seen as continuous with such considerations as Wolff’s on opposition. In a loose sense (Hegel’s sense) something can be considered a form of contradiction if that thing’s qualitative determination excludes or “contradicts” its contrary. (Very roughly, it must have a positive and a negative value.)

This is not the sense of contradiction throughout the Logic, but it gives us enough background (a) to appreciate that Hegel is neither a lunatic for saying that “everything is contradictory,”75 nor a mystical Heraclitean and (b) to consider a couple of significant examples of the “movement” Hegel generates by invoking the notion in the logic of being.