6
# ESSENCE AS REFLECTED BEING
The Essence Problem
According to Hegel, the Concept is the “ground and the source of all finite determinateness and manifoldness” (SL 12.23). With respect to the question of logic as metaphysics, we have interpreted that claim as best understood by comparison with Aristotle’s notion of a formal cause, with the status of the concept understood hylomorphically, not as a separate, metaphysical entity. We have interpreted the progression of the SL to involve a growing self-consciousness of pure thinking about itself and its role as “ground and source” of the minimal determinateness without which objects could not intelligibly be what they are. We reach now the most decisive transition in that process.

The idea that we will now investigate—that the world that is directly accessible around us, as it just “seems” to be, makes coherent sense only if it is understood as the expression of what is not sensibly accessible, but rather “posited”—has been one of the most persistent and powerful ones in the Western philosophical tradition, and not just in the Western tradition. Versions of the idea range from the claim that nothing directly accessible is at all real, that life is a dream, to views about the lesser “degrees of reality” in what is directly accessible, to views linked to the idea because of a resolute denial of it, insisting that the measure of the real just is what is directly accessible in our experience—that, and nothing more.

The logic of essence is organized into three sections, “Reflection,” “Appearance,” “Actuality”; and “Actuality” is organized into three sections, “The Absolute,” “Actuality,” “The Absolute Relation.” I aim here for a relatively high-altitude view of this structure, with the intention of mainly interpreting the logic of the essence-appearance relation and why essence is ultimately understood as a kind of relationality. Even this I will do only in a limited way, with respect to our main question about logic and metaphysics.

That claim about a distinction between what is truly real or essential and what appears, or that way of thinking, is now on the Logic’s agenda. The major issue throughout has concerned the possibility of intelligibly determinate actuality, which Hegel has also characterized as “the universal,” the “in and for itself Sache,” the logos, “the reason of that which is,” the “value of the matter” (Wert der Sache), “the essentialities” (Wesenheiten).1 That is not a question about which things exist or what sorts of things exist. It is an inquiry about the determinations necessary to pick a thing out as what it “actually” is. Our examples in chapter 2 were: A practice exists, and we want to know not merely what happens or whether it exists but whether the practice is actually a religious practice. Or a computer wins at chess, but is it actually thinking?2 Something is displayed in a gallery, but is it actually art? These are questions the force of which does not depend on the continuing existence of the practice or computer. Our assumption has been that we cannot successfully make sense of objects and events and other persons unless we know how to distinguish such actuality from the unimportant, the ignorable, the accidental or irrelevant.

These questions are just examples. The Logic is not concerned with them, and, we should say, is concerned with actuality as such, the possible actuality of anything intelligible, the concepts or categories presupposed in any specific determination of anything. These example questions—the actuality of religion, of freedom, of thinking, of art—remain philosophical questions. They will make up what is called Hegel’s Realphilosophie. But they depend on “the logic of actuality” as such, which simply means: how we think about what anything “really is.” As we have seen, the determinations of such conceptuality cannot be empirical; they must be understood, according to Hegel, as “products” of thought’s self-determination of itself, a process that continually realizes thought’s apperceptive nature. Or: the concept gives itself its own actuality. Hegelian conceptuality has this subjective dimension (“thought’s autonomy”),3 even while also being the articulation of the conceptual structure of reality. This has nothing to do with spinning every actual, contingent species-form out of thought’s self-examination. The topic, as it will eventually be addressed in this Logic, is logical or categorial formality as such, not “what are the existing species-forms?” And the concept of formality as such must “give itself its own actuality,” cannot be empirically derived or empirically justified.

The very title of a “logic of essence” suggests (yet again) immediately the philosopher whom Hegel seemed most to admire, Aristotle,4 and we shall see that Hegel will initially formulate the issues as much with Aristotle in mind, especially in the first of the three major sections of this logic, as with modern skeptics and idealists as his targets. But the question as Hegel poses it is very abstract and also takes in Plato, who has his own version of the true actuality of the sensible appearances (the ideas); Spinoza, whose ideas about the relation between substance and its attributes occupy a major section of the Logic; Leibniz, who claimed that the appearance of substantial interaction and real relations was mere appearance, to be contrasted with monadic actuality; and Fichte, for whom the actuality of the appearances was a transcendental dimension, the ego’s self-positing.

The Aristotelian and initial version of the question at issue will be: having identified what is basic or fundamental to reality, that on which all other manifestations depend but which is itself ontologically independent—the issue Aristotle called substance, the substrate, the underlying—we will want to know what substance or any substance should be said to be, its essence. And Hegel will follow for a while an Aristotelian track, treating essence as a logos, a discursive principle of intelligibility, where that logos is form, and he will then explore its relation to what form comes paired with: form and essence, form and matter, form and content. He will then turn to the question of what such a determination can explain, make sense of, how it could be thought of as ground.

We should briefly recall the general movement of the SL thus far. At first, in the logic of being, we took our bearings from the qualitative manifestations of things. In the simplest sense this means, from how a thing ordinarily looks; what properties does it reliably manifest and how much of it is there and what is the relation (a kind of ratio) between “what properties?” and “how much?”

We found in the logic of being that, according to Hegel, it was not possible to specify a thing’s “actual” being by qualitative and quantitative markers, although we can say a lot about what exists, about what, it turns out, “merely” exists. The conditions of actual determinacy, a conceptual content that specifically determines a this as a “this such,” cannot be satisfied by such means. This was the problem of “indifference” summarized at the end of the previous chapter.5 Since Hegel accepts the Aristotelian premise that actually to be is to be a this-such, where that means it is identifiable by being an instance of a kind, this means we have failed with respect to the question of actuality.6 We are thereby compelled, in the prosecution of the original task, to consider that, “actually,” a thing is not how it simply appears, looks, sensibly manifests itself, however regular or predictable. We have to say that in some way, what a thing actually is lies hidden, must be uncovered, posited, a product of thought, not simple empirical apprehension as such.

What we will need is a comprehension of the difference announced as the very first topic discussed in this Logic: the distinction between the “essential” and the “unessential,” and the basis for this differentiation. For this we need to understand first the logical status of the unessential or mere seeming, what Hegel refers to as Schein. This will be an unusual status, since, while there are seemings, seeming is also a kind of nonbeing,7 and even essence is thereby proximally and first understood negatively, as what isn’t manifest, the negation of mere seeming. But whatever seemings are (in not “actually” being), they exist and are determinate, a determinacy inexplicable, Hegel claims, by the “skeptics and idealists” who claim that this distinction cannot be made, and therefore say, “everything is illusory” or mere Schein. A determination of what isn’t a mere seeming, what is “shining,” will require an account of the forms of “reflection” and the “essentialities” of reflection, the “laws” of thought, identity, difference, and contradiction.

So one prominent modality of seeming is the constancy of temporal change, a constancy that would amount to chaos, were we not able to identify some permanence underlying such change. This must be done by reflecting, not by apprehending. Such a reflection would be a search for some identity in a way that could account for its differentiated appearing, all by reflecting under various different understandings of reflection, together with a parallel account of how the essential can be said to be reflected in its manifestations or seemings. And, as noted before, none of this will be adequate unless essence has in effect some work to do. That work must be making sense of why things are as they are, showing how essence becomes ground, Grund. If we can’t do this, Hegel says, we end up, to cite one of his examples, with appeals to the underlying essence that explains the appearances of the earth’s orbit around the sun as the “reciprocal attractive force” between them, something that just repeats in effect the facts (11.304). So what it is to account for something, to account for its intelligibility, now begins to become itself an ever more explicit topic in the Logic, as Hegel lays out what are in effect his interpretations of the various dimensions of the principle of sufficient reason, the most interesting of which in the first section of the logic of essence is what sort of a “ground” (a reason for a thing’s being as it is) a “form” is. With all this in place, essentially the logical principles according to which an account of such a two-tiered account of rationality can be given, the Logic moves to the accounts of appearance, Erscheinungen (which is what Schein has become now that we know how it can be grounded),8 and the important topics that involve another use of the key term “actuality,” Wirklichkeit: Hegel’s understanding of modality.

So the problem that threads through the logic of essence is a straightforward one. If we need some sort of two-tiered conception of reality to explain successful determinacy, how do the two tiers relate to each other? The three sections of this logic are structured by attention to three basic possible answers to such a question.

(i) Reflected “seeming” or Schein,
(ii) Appearance as such, or Erscheinung, the determinate manifesting of essence, and
(iii) Actuality, which has as its main topic that very issue resolved, explanatory and ontological “relation” itself, Verhältnis, and which concentrates on a cause’s relation to, manifestation in, its effect. (As noted, this is, appropriately, the third of Kant’s categorical groupings.)
We begin, that is, with the least determinate version of that relation, mere seeming, unstable Schein, and necessary but indeterminate essence. Since we are beginning with the bare (and already “contradictory”) notion of what is not directly manifest in the manifest, Hegel begins with the “essentialities of reflection,” or what sort of thought, reflection, results in such a determination. Predictably, we get into some trouble if we cannot explain how the relation between essential and unessential makes sense of anything, and we cannot unless we explore the relation of ground itself (including the most sweeping version, the principle of sufficient reason) and grounded, a topic that leads us into the dialectics of form and its consummation in the concepts of condition, finally unconditioned condition.

The upshot of this analysis is a grounded manifestation or “appearance,” where what is essential to such appearance’s determinacy is not hidden or behind it but, as R. G. R. Mure rightly says, “on a level” with it.9 The concept of form has been rethought as the explanatory notion of law, and the explanatory notion of law is understood in terms of such relations as whole/parts, force and its expression, inner/outer.

Overcoming, by understanding the nature of the relation between, all these dualisms and so overcoming a continuing gap between explicans and explicandum is the project of “Actuality,” a topic that brings the objective logic to a close. Now the relation problem is discussed in terms of Spinoza’s substance, or whole, and its attributes and modes, Leibniz’s monads, the actual’s relation to the possible and the necessary, and finally the most authoritative modern understanding of ground and grounded, cause and effect, a discussion that ends with reciprocal cause and effect as the transition to the logic of the concept.

So we are presented with a string of topics building on the same problem inherited from the logic of being—the reflective determination of identity within or underlying manifest differences, ground-grounded, form-matter complex, condition-conditioned, force and its expression, inner-outer, substance-attribute, possibility-actuality, cause-effect, reciprocal causality. So much for the road map.

Schein
The basic, initial idea in this Logic, the idea of an “essence,” the knowability of which requires an act of “reflection,” is a familiar and a wide-ranging one. An analogy (a rough one!) would be an approach to a literary text. Someone who had understood everything said onstage, the plot of Shakespeare’s King Lear, and the basic motivations of the characters, as those characters and others voice them, and had understood only that, would not, we feel entitled to say, have understood “the play.”10 Put in the simplest possible way, to understand the play, one has to do more than listen to it; one must think about it, or we can say, using the word most important for Hegel, “reflect” on it, understand what lies “beneath,” we are also wont to say, these facts about plot and characters.11 In the EL §112Z, he introduces reflection as simply “thinking something over” (nachdenken) and he connects the reflective search for essences as broadly the task of philosophy itself, a way of looking behind what he calls a mere “rind” or a “curtain,” so as to see essence (or, as above, what is truly actual), where it lies “hidden” (verborgen).12 (These are only initial, orienting metaphors of course. There is no such thing as a hidden meaning in King Lear; there are just the words spoken or found on the page. How we get from this clumsy metaphor to the “concept” of King Lear in itself is the underlying story of the logic of essence.)

An even more intuitive example is another used to illustrate the same point in the EL §112Z, the relation between a person’s character, “essence” in that sense, and her deeds. It would be a mistake to sum a person up, attempt to “understand” her in the distinct way persons should be understood, simply by adding up or listing everything she did, from what she had for breakfast to her volunteering for a dangerous mission. A person would not be properly understood by attention to such “immediacy” alone (or her qualitative/quantitative/measured appearances, as in the logic of being). We need to understand her deeds as “mediated” by what Hegel calls her “inwardness” (sein Inneres), something (and now in the most important difference with the logic of being) that we cannot see, that does not simply present itself.

For example, we can’t really understand what she did except by some attention to her own formulation of the act description and to her avowed motive (her “intention”). Sometimes what happens should not count as a deed because there is not the proper connection between inner and outer. An accident happens. Something prevents her from realizing the intention; that is, something happens to her. She does not do something.13 What happens is not an expression of her character. On the other hand, as Hegel states the central claim of the entire logic of essence in a phrase, we must concede that any such inner self-construal can “prove itself” (sich bewähren) only in what manifests that inner outwardly, in the deeds. (It is immediately important to note that this “test” can fail.) Too radical a separation and we have someone trying to disown what she in fact did, to fabricate excuses. (“Mistakes were made”; “It was never my intention to deceive/hurt/offend anyone,” etc.) We need this distinction, but we can’t establish which deeds are true manifestations of essence and which are mere aberrations by any statistical analysis of frequency, any simple inspection of what happens. We need to understand how “what shows,” “what manifests itself” (Schein), can be said to reflect these deeds’ essence when it does (if it does, then as Erscheinung, appearance), even if, as appearance, no one deed is ever a manifestation or simple representation of essence as such.14

Understanding this relation properly is what Hegel thinks allows him to speak of a mediated immediacy. The appearances are not denied as unreal. They “shine” in their immediacy. But they can be understood in their determinate immediacy only as the manifestation of the thing that they are appearances of, and so as always already mediated. Occasionally, of course, we do not know what they are appearances of, but we do know that they are appearances in that sense, and so that there is something to be found. That is already a mediated immediacy. (Granted, Hegel puts this in a confusing way: “immediacy is rather just this movement itself” [11.250].) We can’t derive the appearances from a mediated (“posited,” “reflected,” “thought-over”) essence. That would be a denial of their immediacy. But we don’t apprehend such appearances on their own, in pure immediacy, and then infer what appears. What appears is appearing in what manifests itself, even if at some moment, it = X. What a person does is tied to that person’s character, whatever it is. And understanding that character is nothing other than rightly understanding what that person has done. With respect to all the reflected dualisms introduced in the logic of essence, this thought in various forms remains the kernel of that logic throughout.15

It is summarized in various ways. For example:

Thus essence appears. Reflection is the internal shining of essence. (11.323)

The task is to demonstrate that the determinations which distinguish it [Schein] from essence are the determinations of essence itself. (11.247)

(If we can, we have Erscheinung.) This is also why essence is a retrospective reflection of what has been made manifest, why it is rooted in gewesen, the past participle of sein or “what has been,” a feature somewhat counterintuitive in an account of action.16 It is also why Hegel is happy to accept the Wesen/gewesen suggestion of temporality. It links his account with one he admired, Aristotle’s, whose term for what is often translated as essence is to ti ēn einai, something like “the what it was to be” of a thing. (Although Hegel qualifies this figurative use of temporality: “The German language has kept ‘essence’ [Wesen] in the past participle [gewesen] of the verb ‘to be’ [sein], for essence is past—but timelessly past—being” [11.241, my emphasis].) Ultimately on Hegel’s account, if we want to know whether this lie reveals a person to be a “liar,” what we need is not to have deeper insight into some thinglike essence, but to observe what else the person does over time and to understand the relation among these deeds, to interpret them or “think them over” in their relation to each other. This will be a crucial point throughout the logic of essence, and it obviously raises the question of how to make, what guides us in making, this relational connection.

Finally, it is important to stress that this topic is being introduced very broadly. No particular theory of “essentialism” is being entertained, and as already noted, making the general distinction just discussed could be achieved even by an account of the difference between transcendental and empirical subjectivity, or between categories and empirical concepts.

The Essence Paradox
This, then, is the problem, but it is propelled onward at the outset by a continuing paradox or tension that first arises in a passage on diversity (Verschiedenheit). The paradox is this: Determinate specification of something essential in an appearance requires essential predication or specification of some sort—some predicates, not others. But we know which predicates are essential only by already knowing what essence is.17 This is a problem that assumes different forms but is basically the same, whether posed in the language of classical essentialism and manifestations, or selecting from a large set of “grounding” casual factors the genuinely explanatory one or ones.

It is also a problem that can be posed in terms of the Aristotelian notion of actuality that I have been suggesting helps illuminate Hegel on Wirklichkeit. For if an object’s intelligibility is primarily a matter of its substantial form, and if that form is to be understood as the distinct being-at-work of the thing, its distinct realization of itself, then this has obvious implications for epistemology. We can be said to know the “what it was to be” of a thing, neither by a direct intellectual intuition (its being-at-work is a process, a way of being, not graspable punctually as itself some object) nor by just observing, say, the life of a living thing or the uses of an artifact. We would already have to be able to distinguish essential from inessential in order to track the relevant “realizations.”18

Later, when Hegel is discussing that dialectical relation between ground and grounded, he expands the same paradox or tension, inherited from the general problem of fixing the determinacy of essence. This is because, if essence is to explain anything, it must be the ground of what immediately “shines” or appears. Those seemings must be its own, and they are made sense of by reference to their essence.

On the one hand, the ground is ground as the immanently reflected content determination of the determinate being [Dasein] which it grounds; on the other hand, it is that which is posited. It is that on the basis of which that determinate being [Dasein] is supposed to be understood; but, conversely, it is inferred from the latter and is understood from it. The main business of this reflection thus consists in gleaning the ground from a determinate being [Dasein], that is, in converting the immediate determinate being [Dasein] into the form of reflected being; consequently the ground, instead of being self-subsisting in and for itself, is rather that which is posited and derived. (11.305, my emphasis)

That is—and here the great difficulty in this Logic begins (and Hegel also, as above, admits again in EL§ 114 that it is the most difficult section of the Logic)19—it is also the case that the “not” in “its actuality is not how it merely seems” is not an “indeterminate” not, wholly unrelated to what it actually is, as it would be in a negation like “that dog is not an electrical charge,” or “protons are not residents of Cleveland.” In some sense, and it is the task of a logic of essence to explain in what sense, the thing’s actuality is both not its own mere seemings, and yet nothing other than those seemings, rightly understood. (Cf. the example of deeds and character above.) As Hegel will say, these seemings are “essence’s own,” even if not direct or immediate manifestation of its actuality in the way a photograph is a representation of and so an appearance of its subject. A person looks different and acts, reacts, speaks differently at different stages of her life. Each of these stages is how she seems, even though she remains “essentially” the same person, and no such stage better or correctly captures her essence. No such stage is a partial or distorted appearance of, representation of, that same person. In the philosophical tradition, the standard way to say that she remains the same person is to say that she has retained the same form, with various different contents at different times, and Hegel, like Aristotle, speaks of that form as “being at work” (energeia, Tätigket, Wirklichkeit) in keeping heterogeneous, different manifestations part of the same unity, which makes possible our making sense of holding together the differing manifestations as all of the same person. This is how Hegel explains the unique character of form’s dynamic activity:

Essence is reflection, the movement of becoming and transition that remains within itself, wherein that which is distinguished is determined simply and solely as the negative in itself, as shine. (11.249, my emphasis)

This is of course a successor to the logic of being’s own two-sided or dialectical concept of negation. There it was a matter of a thing’s excluding, not being its contrary, but also being determinable as what it actually is just by such exclusion. There are many other issues attending the traditional notion of a substrate, or even substance, but these will appear later in Hegel’s account. He is mostly interested here in the “shine” or “seeming” of what is not available except as so “shown” and how we are to understand some underlying unity or sameness, “identity,” throughout qualitative change, where such alterations are understood as these “seemings.”20

Moreover, Hegel is still treating the “logic” of essence-seeming distinctions very generally. Indeed, his treatment is so general that the procedure now is also an implicit exhibition of the method of the Logic itself. Essence, Wesen, is a reflection on Sein itself (a recollection and recovery of its inadequate moments). Being, Sein, can now be understood as a “founded” phenomenon, and the mere seeming, the Schein, of its purported undetermined immediacy can be exposed by understanding Wesen as “reflected Being.” Or the logic of being is an extended demonstration of the insufficiency of such a logic and its “going to the ground” in essence. So when Hegel introduces us to “seeming” (Schein), he says:

Being is Schein. The being of Schein consists solely in the sublatedness of being, in being’s nothingness; this nothingness it has in essence, and apart from its nothingness, apart from essence, it does not exist. It is the negative posited as negative.

Schein is all that remains of the sphere of Being. (11.246)

He is in effect saying that a putative logic of being is, has shown itself to be, mere seeming, Schein. As Theunissen points out, this means that Hegel is actually invoking the notion of Schein in three different senses. There is the unacknowledged Schein that a logic of being has turned out to be. There is the Schein of the mere appearances that the skeptic and idealists claim are all we are able to know. And there is the result of the analysis, that this purported limitation of knowledge to mere Schein is itself Schein, unable to account for itself; what seemed mere Schein turns out to be the Schein of essence or Erscheinung.21

In other words, the illusion of any possible absolute presuppositionlessness is what has been demonstrated by showing that Sein must be understood as Wesen, just in order to be understood as Sein.22 (“Being is as such only the becoming of essence” [11.317]) Or, Sein is now revealed as the failed presumption of a possible independent and immediate intuitional moment, now considered “logically”; Wesen will show itself (and itself as the truth of Sein) as always already conceptually mediated determinacy.23

The Logic of Reflection
So there are seemings and there is essence. We can say that the concept of these “seemings”24 is what a reflection-conception requires, but as “immediate,” as what just presents itself, the accessible manifestations of something not manifest. Essence itself is also “reflection” (and so knowable only as reflected), but obviously in that one-sidedly still “objective” sense just discussed. (As if what is needed to understand such a reflection of essence is somehow observational, intuitive, passive. It isn’t.)

Hegel says reflection is “the movement of becoming and transition that remains within itself” (11.249). This is an introduction to the contrast mentioned above between the status of negation in both the SL and the EL. Essence’s seemings are its own (“remains within itself”), not something other than, qualitatively different from, another thing, as in the logic of being, even though no seeming or set of appearances express in their immediacy what that essence actually is.25 This contrast is clear in this passage.

In the becoming of being, it is being which lies at the foundation of determinateness, and determinateness is reference to an other. Reflective movement is by contrast the other as negation in itself, a negation which has being only as self-referring [sich beziehende]. (Ibid., my emphasis)

Plato, Kant, Locke, Spinoza, and others can all be cited in various ways as expressive of the reflective logic of the appearances of essence, the manifestation of something substantial that is nevertheless not manifest as it is in itself. To understand how this is possible, Hegel argues that it has become necessary to understand the content of and relation among the “determinations of reflection” by means of which essences can be established (qualitative identities fixed and differentiated from others) and a proper relation to appearances established: “identity, difference, and contradiction.” Such examples are still relevant, but I would like to introduce a discussion of these determinations by returning to an example suggested in chapter 3. In keeping with an orientation from, but by no means an identification with, the Kantian origins of some of these problems, we can see that the relation between identity (or the kind of unity that makes any identification possible) and difference (or the manifold, the elements of any manifold considered apart from any unity) is congruent with the Kantian Ur-distinction between concept (the principle of unity and so identification) and intuition (the principle and source of differentiation). Kant simply assumes this gap (on the standard account of Kant, at any rate), and so his philosophy has no chance to be systematic. It relies on what seems a psychological claim about human nature. It would be wrong to say that Hegel will “derive difference from identity” (just as it would be wrong to make either identity or differentiation, affirmation or negation, superordinate to the other and then attempt a derivation), for all the reasons explored in chapter 4. This is basically a deductive model of systematicity and it is not Hegel’s.

There is a moment near the end of his exploration of the first determination, identity, that reveals how he takes himself to be arguing. He is working against the idea that the principle of identity can be understood as “abstract identity,” as articulated simply by “A = A,” “a tree is a tree,” “God is God.” He argues that A can be understood in its self-identity only determinately, and that means by something not-A, and the context makes clear that he means, not the mere repetition of A itself as that determination, but determinate predicates that, we would say, do not mean the same thing as A. So not “human being is human being,” but something like “human being is rational animal,” where “rational animal” is not (and here the quotation marks matter) “human being” again (has a different meaning, Sinn). (There is no indication that Hegel thinks that by such essential and determinate predication we have said that A = ~A and have embraced contradiction by confusing the “is of identity” with the “is of predication.” It is determinate—if also essential—predication throughout.) We have not derived “difference” in this sense from “identity,” but the exposition has shown that identification (identity at work, one should say) requires already, in itself, just by being thought through, an appeal to differentiating factors. Otherwise nothing is determinately identified. His language is:

No justification is normally given for how the form of negation by which this principle is distinguished from the other comes to identity.—But this form is implied by the pure movement of reflection which identity is, by the simple negativity which is contained in a more developed form by the just stated second formulation of the principle. A is enunciated, and a not-A which is the pure other of A; but this not-A only shows itself in order to disappear. In this proposition, therefore, identity is expressed as a negation of negation. (11.265)

Again, the not-A invoked here is explicitly to be in contrast with identity formulated as the repetition of A, and refers to predicative differentiation. But it is essential predication, not accidental. “It shows itself in order to disappear.” In showing human to be rational animal, the subject term, as he sometimes says, is wholly “covered” by the predicate term. Having understood the essential predication, we understand that this not-A, these predicates, are just (now differentiated) A again. They “disappear” as alien or accidental predicates.

So it is possible to show something like the equiprimordiality or co-dependence of identity (identification) and difference (differentiation), but it is also possible to understand how someone like Fichte might have thought in terms of such superordination. And this in the following way.

As noted in chapter 2, the synthetic unity of apperception unqualifiedly necessary for intending any content amounts to what Hegel wants to call “the unity of the concept,” which itself constitutes the representation of an object, given that an object is “that in the concept of which the manifold is united.” I maintain that, considered independently of Hegel’s critique of Kant’s strict separation of understanding and sensibility, this is the link between apperceptive unity and the relation between concept and object that Hegel himself adopts in the passages where he praises Kant for having discovered the “unity of the concept” as what it is to be an object, to have that unity. That is the point of the laudation. But if one looks at this as Fichte did, one could say something like: the self’s presence to itself throughout all its experiences (or in Fichte, the I’s positing of itself) could be seen as the ground of the possibility of the self’s relation to an object (in the sense of: the I’s positing the not-I, and itself as in opposition to the not-I). This is at least the kind of intimate interdependence that Hegel explores in this section, often in ways that have a Fichtean dimension. But what he does not do is treat the I’s self-positing (apperception) as the superordinate principle from which the relation to the not-I is to be deduced. (This required that the nicht-Ich be in some sense posited by the Ich, and that meant that it is actually not [nicht] the nicht-Ich [but the Ich-posited-nicht-Ich], accounting for some of the paradoxical invocations of negation in Hegel’s discussion.) That passage quoted earlier expresses his own sense of equiprimordiality, or mutual interdeducibility, we could say. “The pure movement of reflection which identity is” (identity understood actively as the power to successfully identify) is to be understood by reference to “the simple negativity which is contained in a more developed form by the just stated second formulation of the principle” (A’s being A by already not being ~A, such that the determinate predicates by which A is specified actually do specify it).26

The Varieties of Reflection
Especially when looked at in terms of its Kantian background, this elusive thought is the most important in the Logic. The issue in the logic of being concerned the misleading appearance of a presuppositionless beginning with the concept “being,” and by contrast the true beginning of the logic in the discovery of the inseparability of affirmation and negation, “becoming” in Hegel’s language. This “master thought” in some sense refers all at once to the co-definability of qualitative independence and dependence (substance independence and relational dependence)27 in the logic of being; the identity within difference of essence and appearance, and so ultimately of ground and what is grounded in the logic of essence; and the way in which Hegel wants to understand the concrete universal, that is, the inseparability of particular and universal in the logic of the Concept. (That is, not at all as a reductive attempt to argue for the absoluteness of conceptual intelligibility, as if particularity must be a matter of qualitative conceptuality, as in the traditional criticism of Hegel.) All of these formulations amount to Hegel’s attempt to think through the implications of the distinguishability yet inseparability of what Kant distinguished as concept and intuition and Kant’s attempt to strictly separate transcendental aesthetic from transcendental logic from transcendental dialectic, or the “logics” of sensibility, understanding, and reason. One could also say that whereas in Kant, experiential intelligibility seems modeled on some sort of a two-step process—the sheer deliverances of sensibility, and then the imposition of conceptual unity—in Hegel’s contrasting account, these two components, and all their avatars in the list above, are both in a way dual and in a way one. Finding a way to state properly the mutual implicability of some way of understanding differentiability and identification, the diversity of required predication, and the (paradoxically independent) unity without which these would be nearly diverse amounts to the great struggle in all of the Logic and is leading us toward the famous statement at 11.286 that “All things are in themselves contradictory.”28 (Hegel’s suggestion that Kant’s concept-intuition distinction should be understood as primarily a logical or conceptual problem, that we do not yet know how to think together their inseparability with their distinctness, reaches its most crucial turning point in the logic of essence in his account of reflection. The “immediacy” of Schein as nevertheless also mediated, determinate even when the skeptic insists on the absence of a determining essence, is a pivot of the book, why it is so important for commentators like Henrich and Theunissen. The resolution of the book will then have one of its many names: the problem of “absolute reflection.”)

How this equipoise between the distinct, determinate, and various moments of Schein and the identical essence that “shines” through such appearances is to be understood is now treated by Hegel as involving three different possibilities of reflective determination, all of which turn out to be linked, none of which is self-sufficient. If we think of the account in terms of our example of the relation between a person’s character/essence and her particular deeds, then, since all we “immediately” are presented with are the actual deeds, the character or essence must be in some way “posited” (rather than apprehended or seen). But the positing cannot be arbitrary; what guides our positing is what we think the deeds must “presuppose” to be the deeds they are. A person is scrupulous about promise-keeping and avoiding malicious gossip, yet on one occasion he reveals a deep confidence he promised not to reveal, and that greatly damages another’s reputation. Does such a deed have to presuppose “the type of person who would do that,” perhaps constrained in the past only by simply having no interest in the confidences or the person (or never having had the right opportunity before)? Or is the deed an aberration for which extenuating circumstances can be found, such that no presupposition of such a type would be warranted? If we don’t know how to connect in any determinate way the deed with the inward character being manifested (or not), then our positing/presupposing reflection is just a form of “external” reflection. This externality, though, is crucial; it is the source of whatever determinate positing is possible. That is, the external deed is some sort of manifestation of not keeping faith with an avowed commitment; that much can be presupposed. But what “that much” means, with only that external link, remains indeterminate. Even if the person never does such a thing again, we still won’t be able to determine what she, “being who she is,” would do on the right occasion. He could be virtuous by dint of good luck, of never finding himself in a situation where revealing a confidence would benefit or in some other way tempt him.

It can be made more determinate if we can exercise “determining reflection.” Before introducing that mode of reflection, Hegel, in a remark, notes Kant’s distinction in the Critique of the Power of Judgment between determining and reflective judgment. The latter is of the type just discussed; we are given a particular, a specific deed, and we seek reflectively the universal it instantiates, in this case what is essentially true of a person across her various deeds—her type. (This is not the kind of example Kant gives. He is often more interested in the comparison and abstraction of empirical concept formation. But the point is the same.) As we saw in chapter 5, Hegel implies that the way Kant has described the situation—given a particular, find the universal—is misleadingly “external.” For what we are supposed to “ascend to” and discover is not really external to the instance being reflected on. It is, he says, it must already be, “its true being” (eigentliches Seyn) in the first place. And so we have another example of a distinctness that is also inseparable: the determining judgment—the supposed application of a universal to a particular—strictly separate from reflective judgment, understood as “given a particular, find the universal.” There is no credible way to understand the particular as “external” to the power of reflection like this. As we noted in the previous chapter, as “waiting” for its universal, it isn’t anything determinate at all; as provoking a universal-search, on the assumption that it has not been classified as a kind, it has nothing determinate to guide or direct such a search. It could be said to have scores of properties. Which are relevant? What Hegel calls “reflection in general” must rather be characterized as “determining reflection,” a term he wants to cover both determining and reflective judgment. This is to be understood, in his terms, as the unity of positing and external reflection. What is external, say, the deeds in our example, are not just uniform repetitions of the self-same essence; they are all other than essence, and so “are not” that essence, and so in that sense are its negative. And so they must be, if what is posited as essence is to be concrete, determinate. But what is so posited cannot be merely posited, but must be determinately linked to appearances of such an essence, not mere semblances, with no bearing on it.29 To be able to do this we need to have the notion of ground, and so to understand the relation between ground and what it grounds. What exactly is the relation between subjectively avowed principles—“who I take myself actually to be”—or my self-expressed intentions and what they ground, external bodily movements?

This thought actually parallels one of Kant’s points, or at least follows the same logic. It is sometimes made in terms of Kant’s abstract separation between “analysis,” his term for the abstraction from intuitions, reflection on common markers, which yields an “analytic universal,” and “synthesis,” what any analysis presupposes since any identified content already, as determinate, involves a number of concepts synthetically. The two activities presuppose one another, in a clear manifestation of Hegelian dialectic. It is also expressed as the relation between an “analytic unity of apperception” and a “synthetic unity of apperception.” The claim is that any analytic unity of apperception, recognizing a commonality in diversity, red in several different red things, presupposes a synthetic unity, the unification of a diversity in the first place, the synthetic bringing together of (only) red objects. So Kant says:

Therefore it is only because I can combine a manifold of given representations in one consciousness that it is possible for me to represent the identity of the consciousness in these representations itself, i.e., the analytical unity of apperception is only possible under the presupposition of some synthetic one. The thought that these representations given in intuition all together belong to me means, accordingly, the same as that I unite them in a self-consciousness, or at least can unite them therein, and although it is itself not yet the consciousness of the synthesis of the representations, it still presupposes the possibility of the latter, i.e., only because I can comprehend the manifold in a consciousness do I call them all together my representations; for otherwise I would have as multicolored, diverse a self as I have representations of which I am conscious. (CPR B134)

But it would seem just as true that I can combine the manifold in a self-consciousness only if the manifold is perceived as combinable, that I can “combine a manifold of given representations in one consciousness” only because I have already been able to detect an “identity of consciousness in these representations.” Or the synthetic unity of apperception is also possible only on the presupposition of an analytic one. Yet again we encounter a mutually presupposing relation, here in “determinate reflection.”

This is all an example of what has been characterized here as the core thought in the logic of essence. Hegel’s way of putting the thought should now seem at least recognizable in terms of the above formulations.

Reflection thus finds an immediate before it which it transcends and from which it is the turning back. But this turning back is only the presupposing of what was antecedently found. (SL 11.252)

And,

This antecedent comes to be only by being left behind; its immediacy is sublated immediacy.—The sublated immediacy is, contrariwise, the turning back into itself, essence that arrives at itself, simple being equal to itself. This arriving at itself is thus the sublating of itself and self-repelling, presupposing reflection, and its repelling of itself from itself is the arriving at itself. (11.252)

He continues in passages like this to suggest that the key to understanding the concept of a mediated immediacy is to think of that relation as sustained by a kind of “movement,” or even “oscillation,” a movement in which the poles are linked together, not distinct punctual entities. Recall: Essence is reflection, “the movement of becoming and transition that remains within itself” (11.249, my emphasis). An even clearer passage:

Essence as such is one with its reflection, inseparable from its movement. It is not essence, therefore, through which this movement runs its reflective course; nor is essence that from which the movement begins, as from a starting point. It is this circumstance that above all makes the exposition of reflection especially difficult, for strictly speaking one cannot say that essence returns into itself, that essence shines in itself, for essence is neither before its movement nor in the movement: this movement has no substrate on which it runs its course. (11.295)30

Having set the issue out in Kantian terms, Hegel is also interested in distinguishing himself from Kant.

But at issue here is neither the reflection of consciousness [Kant’s problem, or so Hegel thinks], nor the more specific reflection of the understanding that has the particular and the universal for its determinations, but reflection in general. It is clear that the reflection to which Kant assigns the search of the universal for a given particular is likewise only an external reflection which applies itself to the immediate as to something given. But the concept of absolute reflection, too, is implicit in it. For the universal, the principle or the rule and law, to which reflection rises in its process of determination is taken to be the essence of the immediate from which the reflection began; the immediate, therefore, to be a nothingness which is posited in its true being only by the turning back of the reflection from it, by the determining of reflection. Therefore, what reflection does to the immediate, and the determinations that derive from it, is not anything external to it but is rather its true being. (11.254–55)

On the Principle of Sufficient Reason
In general, this means nothing but this: Anything which is, is to be considered to exist not as an immediate, but as a posited; there is no stopping at immediate determinate being [Dasein] but a return must rather be made from it back into its ground, and in this reflection it is a sublated being and is in and for itself. What is expressed by the principle of sufficient reason is, therefore, the essentiality of immanent reflection as against mere being. (SL 11.293)

I have already indicated what some would call a somewhat deflationary reading of such a determination of reflection (at least as compared with the conventional interpretations). We can see why that reading applies here too by noting what Hegel has to say about Leibniz’s identity of indiscernibles, which he introduces in a remark.

He starts by noting that one form of the principle “No two things are alike” is “superfluous” or trivial. It is merely repeating emphatically that two things must be two things. The more ambitious principle is Leibniz’s: there cannot be two things that are completely alike, share each and every property. Since for Leibniz even spatial differentiation is relational, and relational properties are in truth monadic (monads are in no real relation to others, are windowless), if two monads had, as the complete expression of all their determinations, everything alike, they could not be two. On that assumption about the relationality of space and the monadic quality of substance, they would share the same spatial location, and could not be two things. Since Leibniz conceives monads atomistically, what he needs is some differentiating factor in monadic expression, lest he beg his own question and just assume the impossibility of identical qualitative predicates. He must, rather, explain it. That involves his notion of monadic point of view or particular appetition in expression.31 This is not important for the point Hegel is trying to make, because Leibniz cannot show (according to Hegel) how that assumption serves to account for (or, in the general sense we have been tracking, make any sense of) the distinct predicates that result from it. In Leibniz’s world, these determinations just seem to “bubble up” from their mysterious source.32 We are back to the problem of the “internal reflection” of essence as ground, and the distinct determinations that it grounds. Here this in effect means that Hegel’s position is not that Leibniz is either right or wrong but that the question posed rests on a confusion and so is misleading. This is because the “principles” of identification and differentiation are deeply intertwined, not independent of each other. We have no access to some set of determinations except as already ascribable to a substrate identified as what it distinctly (or essentially) is. That is (and is only) what makes them a proper set. And we have no access to such a substrate except by the specification of its “determinate” differentiae.33 Realizing this is supposed to be the resolution of the essence paradox introduced above in section 3.

Hegel remarks that this too all sounds as strange to ordinary reflection as the first superfluous version. We assume diversity starting out, unlikeness within some likeness, and also assume that “the determination of unlikeness pertains to all things.” But as above, we have to show how the expression of a thing in its properties (in its “seemings” or Schein) serves to differentiate it as the unique expression of those determinations.

It is the ordinary norm of cognition itself to require a demonstration for linking diverse determinations together into one synthetic proposition, or to indicate some third term in which such determinations are mediated. Such a demonstration would have to display the transition from identity to diversity, and the transition then from diversity to determinate diversity, to unlikeness. (11.271)

This is what Leibniz (and Spinoza for that matter) cannot do. And this result reintroduces the issue we see continually reappearing in the logic of essence. The “determinate diversity” is determinately distinctive by being understood as the unique expression of a concrete particular, but that concrete particular has no concreteness except in terms of the unique determinations that concretely specify it.

More generally, a thing’s determinate properties are not, cannot be, a mark of that thing’s unlikeness from other things, just by being those properties. One subject has one property, another has another different property. If one thing is red and another square, we do not thereby know one is unlike the other; they are just two different things. A locomotive has nothing to do with a melody; it is not unlike a melody. Someone saying that would have to be joking in some way. We are trying to account not for determinate otherness, as in the logic of being, but for how objects that share properties (are like) could be, even with an extraordinary degree of such likeness, still unlike. Kant argued that it was by means of spatial differentiation alone, and, somewhat surprisingly, Hegel is willing to sign on,34 although this all opens up the question of how, in his Philosophy of Nature, he understands such spatial differentiability. Kant appealed to a strictly nonconceptual mode of presentation in his theory of space, an intuitive mode, and Hegel has to concede the role of some such apprehension while denying again such a strict separation. This means that spatial location has to be concept-involving even if not wholly so (which would reassume strict separability). What interests Hegel more now is the way the determinations “like” and “unlike” function in the general logic of essence and appearance. As he puts it,

What we then have is this determination, that the two moments, likeness and unlikeness, are different in one and the same thing, or that their differentiating difference is at the same time one and the same reference. Here is where we have the transition into opposition. (11.272)

This is an abrupt transition to the next topic, the prelude to the discussion of contradiction, and his clarification is relatively unclear. After dismissing as unsatisfying a “like in some respects, unlike in other respects” resolution, which merely avoids rather than confronts the “one and the same” issue, he says:

But it is this reflection which, in one and the same activity, distinguishes the two sides of likeness and unlikeness, by the same token contains them in one activity, and lets the one shine reflected into the other. (11.272)

The implication is that in whatever respect something can be said to be like, it can in that respect be said to be unlike, and we have our unusual “two in one” principle again, “like and unlike” but in “one activity.”35

Some of this anticipates topics in the logic of the Concept. Two trees are alike in being both trees but unlike in being two individual trees. The idea will be that it is just in their likeness, their way of being alike, that they are unlike (different trees), just in the way each distinctly instantiates “treeness” that they are unlike. Such a different “way of being a tree” is not another property but the way the tree-properties are “had” by the individual.

In this context, as soon becomes clear, Hegel is thinking of the way in which the specifying work of “unlikeness” cannot be a matter of individual properties, atomistically conceived, but unlikeness within likeness is best understood as some content, the unlikeness of which is strict, even within such likeness. Some charge can be both positive and negative; some number, 4, can be both +4 and -4; some quantity of money can be an asset and also a debt pending; some force can be attractive and repelling; some distance marched east is canceled by the same distance marched west, and all of these are “opposed” only within some common likeness.36

The opposites do indeed cancel themselves in reference to each other, the result being equal to zero; but there is also present in them their identical reference which is itself indifferent to the opposition; so the two constitute a one. (11.276)

And, just as Michael Wolff has stressed, Hegel tells us that this is the sense he means when he invokes the notion of contradiction. It is merely a way of explaining how the same “reference” can be the same, a basis for likeness (the same number), and yet have diametrically opposed determinations of that content. The “world’s being contradictory” means nothing more than that, as he says, virtue cannot be virtue by just being other than, different from, in comparison with, vice, but only by “the opposition and the combat in it” against vice (11.284). The idea of what is called a self-subsistent, independently definable notion of virtue is, he is claiming, impossible.

But, further, by thus being posited as self-subsistent, they make themselves into a positedness. They fate themselves to founder [Sie richten sich zu Grunde],37 since they determine themselves as self-identical, yet in their self-identity they are rather the negative, a self-identity which is reference-to-other. (11.281)

So, as with the logic of being, determinations that seem incompatible with each other, like relation to self and relation to other, are not only jointly compatible but jointly necessary as a condition of determinate intelligibility; here an original identification by virtue of which determinate specification can be determinate, and a differentiating specification necessary for the original identification. No wonder Hegel keeps talking about determinations “bending back into” what they are originally opposed to.

Real Opposition
Given the development of the reflection-determination, contradiction, out of the understanding of differentiation as opposition, it should be clear that Hegel is not introducing contradiction as a formal-logical matter, a matter of what Kant called “analytic” contradiction (the logically false), as well as that he objects to Kant’s treatment of dialectical contradiction—the apparently unavoidable commitment to contrary judgments—as something illusory, some sort of mistake (like trying to reason about anything beyond what can be experienced). Hegel is trying to specify how affirming contrary predicates (“in opposition”) does not amount to a logical contradiction. That is the point of his discussion, to make this distinction, not to treat such oppositions as if they were logically contradictory and then affirm them anyway. As Wolff puts it, Hegel’s orientation (as this extended section of reflection makes clear) is not from sentence or predicate negation, but from developments in the understanding of negative numbers and from Kant’s defense of Newton on positive and negative magnitudes.38 In general, then, mathematical, not logical negation. In the language Hegel developed, radical differentiation (opposition) can exist within an identity, giving us a way to understand a kind of substantivization of “negativity” and so a resistance to the standard way of thinking about sameness and difference. (This is the type of negation and its implications proper to a logic of being. The negation that is involved in the self-determining development of the Logic as a whole is a different issue, addressed in chapter 7.)

It is in this sense that Hegel can assert that contradictions (these sorts of oppositions) are “real,” and that Kant had “too much tenderness” for things by attributing dialectical results to thought’s error. An amount of money can at the same time be a credit and a debt for the debtor (he has the money, but it is encumbered); a number can be a positive or negative number (Wolff is especially helpful in tracking the significance of the new notion of negative numbers just emerging in Hegel’s day, as something other than “subtractive” force);39 a force can be attractive or repelling; a magnitude can be a positive or a negative magnitude. Or, we wanted to say in the logic of being, something like virtue is the contrary of vice by being virtue, and yet its determinacy as virtue is constituted by its negative exclusion of vice. Here we want also to say: virtue is virtue by opposing, struggling with, vice. And vice is not merely the other of virtue, or the mere privation of virtue (that could also be innocence). It is, Hegel says, taking a stand against virtue, rejecting it, or it does not count as vice. (These are reflected determinations, not qualities. A moving force is not just excluded by a mass with greater inertial force; it is negated, opposed by that force, although all we see are the qualities of motion and then rest.) So we can also say, in Hegelese: if virtue (X) is (is identical with) the active negation of (opposition to) vice (Y), or X = ~Y, and vice is the active negation of (opposition to) virtue, or Y = ~X, then substituting for Y, X = ~ (~X); it is what it is as a self-related negated negation. Virtue is in opposition to what is in opposition to virtue (vice). And this is not simply equivalent, as it would be in the logical sense, to X = X. Hence all of Hegel’s flights into double negation language, and the co-dependence of reflective determinations.40

Or, what is opposed to a determination is not the lack or absence of that determination, but a negative determination. Hegel could have just as easily said to make his point, as a direct echo of Newton and Kant’s defense, that “negation” is in the world. 4 cannot be greater than 3 and less than 3 at the same time; but it can be +4 and -4, and it is both only in relation to each other. Or, if the same object can be considered both a thing in itself and an appearance, and these in opposition, then such an object of reflection exists in a state of such self-opposition; it can be considered thereby in “contradictory” determinations.

Ground
Borrowing from Aristotle, we can say that it is possible to know a lot without understanding much. We could know that people who smoke heavily tend to get cancer and heart disease, without understanding this fact. We would understand it if we knew what the relationship was between the two events; if we knew that smoking caused cancer and heart disease. We are not satisfied with knowing what happens; we want to know why.41 Likewise, if we knew that there was some feature of a thing without which such a thing could not be determinately picked out, identified, we would also want to understand how knowing this about that feature could actually explain anything typical of such a thing, could explain its “showings,” Schein, or manifestations. Hegel introduces this question with one of his lapidary summary claims: “Essence determines itself as ground” (SL 11.291).

But from everything we have seen, the central difficulty of the logic of essence will reappear. To use an empirical example, if the question is something like “Why did the ball fall to the ground?” we want to avoid two kinds of answers: “because whenever a heavy object is dropped from a height, it falls”; and “it is in the nature of heavy things to fall.” Doing so, avoiding these alternatives, will allow us to see that the relation between a “ground” and “what it grounds” must be understood as a dynamic relation, one whereby the determinacy of the ground and that of the grounded cannot be fixed in isolation from each other. We can isolate the discussion of ground, but the general point, the necessity of essence, the paradox of essence, and the resolution in this suggestion of a dynamical relation, is paradigmatic for the entire discussion in the second book of the SL. So Hegel explores this relational character by discussing “law” (Gesetz) and “relation” in general (Verhältnis). The summary of where his account is going is given in this passage.

But the being that appears and essential being stand referred to each other absolutely. Thus concrete existence is, third, essential relation; what appears shows the essential, and the essential is in its appearance.—Relation is the still incomplete union of reflection into otherness and reflection into itself; the complete interpenetrating of the two is actuality. (11.323–24)

This “reflection into otherness,” essence and its appearances, for example, or form and the form-matter whole, or ground and grounded, or cause and effect, and then the realization that this otherness is actually a reflection into itself, are all two moments of one whole. Essence is its appearance; ground functions as ground only in the act of grounding, developing as the ground it is as it develops in this act. The general point he keeps making is: a strict separation of the two moments, and an insistence that the nature of an appeal to an essence, or to a causal law, or to someone’s reason for acting cannot be understood as punctuated moments on the billiard-ball model of causation, but involve a kind of unity, the development of a kind of unity, much closer (yet again) to Aristotle on energeia. This essential-being-as-activity, manifesting itself in its appearances, is what should count as “actuality.” This has the implication that many existing things have no actuality, are not really “anything.” A lump of dirt, a cough, a strand of wire. To return to a point made earlier, as Sellars points out,42 in Aristotle’s conception (the philosophical space where Hegel is trying to locate himself), it is perfectly conceivable that one might walk into a sculptor’s studio, see a block of irregularly shaped marble in the corner, ask the prime question for Aristotle, what is it? (ti esti), and be told, “Oh, that. That’s nothing” (it hasn’t been sculpted yet, has no substantial form). The question for Hegel is the question of “actuality,” not “existence,” or the sensibly apprehensible, just as for Aristotle, the question is the “really real,” to ontōs on. Hegel makes this point this way:

On this head, it must be remarked that actuality certainly does form the principle of Aristotle’s philosophy, but his actuality is that of the Idea itself, and not the ordinary actuality of what is immediately present . . . More precisely, therefore, Aristotle’s polemic against Plato consists in his designation of the Platonic idea as mere δύναμις, and in urging, on the contrary, that the Idea, which is recognized by both of them equally to be alone what is true, should be regarded essentially as ἐνέργεια, i.e. the inwardness that is totally to the fore, so that it is the unity of inward and outward. In other words the Idea should be regarded as actuality in the emphatic sense that we have given it here. (EL §142Z)

So it goes too far on this point to suggest, as Longuenesse does, that

Hegel is post-Kantian in that for him the relation between the ‘I think’ and what actually exists is not a relation of description but a relation of constitution. Wirklichkeit is reality as constituted, in all its determinations, by thought. So if Aristotle is called to the stand as a witness against Kant, nevertheless the kind of unity of the intelligible and the sensible affirmed by Aristotle yields to another unity; a unity that emerges at the cost of dissolving and thoroughly digesting the sensible object. There is for Hegel, no immanence of rationality in the immediately present object, and even less . . . any immanence of the rational in a reality external to thought.43

In the first place, “constitution by thought” is expressed in far too Kantian a way and suggests a subjective idealism. The forms of thought are the forms of being; this is a relation of speculative identity, not constituting. Second, there is no dissolving or digesting of the sensible object. The sensible object is left as it is. It is just that the central question of its actuality is a “thought-determination,” one not accessible sensibly, and the Logic concerns not that, but what it is for that to be its actuality. And third, as Hegel notes in the PhG, reason can be said to acquire a certainty that it is “everywhere in the world.” There is no reality (as actuality) “external to thought.” Longuenesse’s formulations do not do justice to what has been a touchstone for us. I cite the relevant passage again.

The logical is to be sought in a system of thought-determinations in which the antithesis between subjective and objective (in its usual meaning) disappears. This meaning of thinking and of its determinations is more precisely expressed by the ancients when they say that nous governs the world, or by our own saying that there is reason in the world, by which we mean that reason is the soul of the world, inhabits it, and is immanent in it as its own innermost nature, its universal. (EL §24)

Hegel does not mean reason is in a particular “world.” Reason is the “soul” of the world.44

As noted in the previous chapter, this dynamical relation, the Ur-relation of all relations in Hegel, is how we should understand rightly the relation between a thing in itself and its appearances, and hence how we can rightly say “we know only appearances” and not mean any phenomenalism. The externalization, then realization that the external is really internal, reflecting out (self-alienation, we could say) and reflecting back, is summarized in this passage.

The thing-in-itself is drawn into a reflection external to it in which it has a manifold of determinations; this is the repelling of itself from itself into another thing-in-itself [Abstossen seiner von sich selbst in ein anderes Ding-an-sich], a repelling which is its rebounding [Gegenstoß] back into itself, for each thing-in-itself is an other only as reflected back from the other; it has its supposition not in itself but in the other, is determined only through the determinateness of the other; this other is equally determined only through the determinateness of the first. (11.329)

I have tried to show in another book45 that the most important, most clarifying implications of this Ur-relation occur in Hegel’s practical philosophy, both in his account of the nature of human agency, and in the implications of that account for the practical theory of freedom in his Philosophy of Right and theory of objective spirit in general. In fact, were there space in this study to discuss in detail the relation between Hegel’s Logic and his Realphilosophie, both the other two parts of the Encyclopedia and his lecture courses, one could show that part of what Hegel means by treating the Logic as “the realm of shadows” is that the full demonstration of the truth of this Ur-relation lies in what it actually illuminates, in the cogency and credibility of, for example, an account of agency based on it. It could then be shown what he means by such paradoxical formulations as:

Thus the inner is immediately only the outer, and it is this determinateness of externality for the reason that it is the inner; conversely, the outer is only an inner because it is only an outer. (11.365)

He does not mean here anything as obvious as: when I do something, my ex ante intention is fulfilled and so becomes something outer, just as what was done, the bodily movement, counts as an action because it expressed this ex ante intention. The passage does not say that the inner becomes outer, nor that the outer is the expression of the inner. It says: there is no ex ante intention except as outer. It is the outer. And there is no outer except as what must count as inner, not that it expresses a separable inner. There is no such separation.46

 
    