3
# THE ROLE OF SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS IN THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC
Apperceptive Logic
This result returns us to the relation between Hegelian speculative logic and Kantian transcendental logic. Kant claimed in the Prolegomena that reliance on pure reason alone produced what he called mere Schein, illusion, not knowledge, that only experience (Erfahrung) produced knowledge.1 (This is already misleadingly put by Kant, for we also, in some contexts, have no choice but to depend on pure reason alone, and the results have a certain kind of legitimacy.2 We should say right away then that there is mere Schein and a Schein that is the “shining of essence.” More of that later.) For Hegel, the situation is exactly the reverse; experience is the realm of potential Schein, pure reason’s knowledge of itself the domain of speculative truth.3 But there is deeper agreement than disagreement between Kant and Hegel on “the logic of possible thinking” when one notes how much of what Kant wants to distinguish as general logic already relies, in his own words, on his transcendental theory, and so on the transcendental determination of possible content, what Hegel has called die Sache. To mention the point on which the heart of the theoretical issue between Kant and Hegel turns, in the Critique Kant writes,

And thus the synthetic unity of apperception is the highest point to which one must affix all use of the understanding, even the whole of logic and, after it, transcendental philosophy; indeed this faculty is the understanding itself. (B134n)4

This is tied to an even more general point:

I find that a judgment is nothing other than the way to bring given cognitions to the objective unity of apperception. That is the aim of the copula is in them: to distinguish the objective unity of representations from the subjective. For this word designates the relation of the representations to the original apperception and its necessary unity, even if the judgment itself is empirical, hence contingent, e.g., “Bodies are heavy.” By that, to be sure, I do not mean to say that these representations necessarily belong to one another in the empirical intuition, but rather that they belong to one another in virtue of the necessary unity of the apperception in the synthesis of intuitions, i.e. in accordance with the principles of the objective determination of all representations insofar as cognition can come from them, which principles are all derived from the principle of the transcendental unity of apperception. (B142)

This is a new theory of judgment and accordingly grounds a new logic. It is hardly an elaboration of what was always known in logic. So Béatrice Longuenesse is right when she writes,

Kant asked himself which logical forms of judgment should be considered primitive if the original function of judgment is to ‘bring given cognitions to the objective unity of apperception,’ that is, to relate our representations to objects. In this sense the transcendental question must have had a key role in the establishment of a systematic table of the logical forms of judgment.5

This all also entails that what we have to call Kant’s “theory of thinking” (“account-giving,” judging) has a component that is not something merely supplemental to the basic features of his general or content-less logic as rules for valid judgings and inferrings. It is, rather, the basic feature: judging is apperceptive. This is a logical (or formal) truth, and because all judging is apperceptive, conscious of judging in judging, it is quite misleading for Kant to formulate the point by saying that the “I think” must “accompany” (begleiten) all my representations (B132).6 Representing objects is not representing objects, a claiming to be so, unless apperceptive (which is in effect what the B132 passage claims). And that has to mean, in a very peculiar sense that is important to Hegel and that will take some time to unpack, that such judgings are necessarily and inherently reflexive, and so at the very least are self-referential, even if such a reflected content is not substantive, does not refer to a subject’s focusing on her judging activity as if it were a second consciousness.

Virtually everything in the Logic of significance descends in one way or another from the proper understanding of this claim. In an earlier book on Hegel,7 I tried to show this by orienting the entire interpretation of Hegel there presented from such passages in the Logic as

It is one of the profoundest and truest insights to be found in the Critique of Reason that the unity which constitutes the essence of the concept is recognized as the original synthetic unity of apperception, the unity of the “I think,” or of self-consciousness. (12.17–18)

And especially, considering that Hegel means by the Concept the fully developed (self-developed) self-consciousness of pure thinking about itself, I argued in that book that it was of the utmost significance that he says such things as

I confine myself to one remark, which may contribute to the comprehension of the concept here developed and facilitate one’s way into it. The concept, when it has progressed to a concrete existence which is itself free, is none other than the “I” or pure self-consciousness. (12.17)

And

This is an objectivity which the subject matter consequently attains in the concept, and this concept is the unity of self-consciousness into which that subject matter has been assumed; consequently its objectivity or the concept is itself none other than the nature of self-consciousness, has no other moments or determinations than the “I” itself. (12.19)8

Thinking’s ability to determine the necessary, constitutive moments of thinking makes, for Hegel, Kant’s strict distinction between general and transcendental logic impossible. And if it is impossible, then we have a form of genuine knowledge in view that undermines the requirement that the content of thinking must always be provided “from without,” and so have in view thinking’s reflective relation to itself as the source of what Hegel calls the “movement” or pulsation of the Logic. The Logic is not, that is, a survey of the structure of thinking but self-determined production. The moments are the products of thought’s self-determination.

So when Kant distinguishes animals from humans in this respect, he notes that there is a difference between “distinguishing things” (something like differential responsiveness) and “cognizing the distinction of things” (knowing and holding in mind what is being distinguished). And from Kant’s 1762 “Essay on the Mistaken Subtlety of the Four Figures”: “The following distinction may be of great use: Logical distinction is the cognition that A is not B, and is always a negative judgment. To distinguish physically is to be impelled by different ideas to different actions.”9 As Tiles puts it: “What distinguishes rational beings is their ability to make their own thoughts and actions the object of their own thought.”10 This is in effect what happens whenever we judge, but if we want to get Kant’s innovation right, we have to be very clear that this has nothing to do with inner perception or the mind observing itself.11

That is, to judge is to be aware not only of what one is judging, but that one is judging, asserting, claiming something. But one is not, cannot be, simultaneously judging that one is judging (something Tiles’s formulation, which is a common one, can easily suggest). Rather, judgment is the consciousness of judging. These are not two acts, but one. As Sebastian Rödl puts it: “The spontaneity of thought is of a special kind: it is a spontaneity whose acts are knowledge.”12 Here again, it is extremely difficult to formulate this point properly. Rödl says: not two acts but one. I know what I believe, for example, know of my beliefs, by being the believer, by being identical with one who believes. But the grammar of the formulation says: acts of theoretical knowledge are also, besides being knowledge of some state of affairs, “knowledge of these very acts.” (Even the formulation “judgment is, is identical with, is the same thing as, the consciousness of judgment” introduces the language of consciousness and object into the apperceptive dimension in a way that is bound to be confusing. This is not yet to mention the reflective oddness of the phrase. If judgment is the consciousness of judgment, that of which it is conscious must itself be the consciousness of judgment.)13 So in knowing that the book is red, if I say that I know something about the book and something about my acts of knowledge, why are there not two acts? I cannot be a believer unless I know that I am believing, and I know that by being the believer. But, besides what I believe, what exactly do I know by being the believer? The formulation “knowledge of my acts” of belief would have to mean I also know that I have knowledge of my acts, and we would be off to the regresses. There must be some way of saying that the self-conscious dimension of thought and action is a matter of the way a claim is made or an action undertaken. To adopt the formulations used by Ryle in accounting for many similar phenomena, they are accomplished “self-consciously,” rather than accompanied by or even identical with another act of consciousness.14

Since Hegel treats thought’s self-consciousness of itself in thinking in terms of the Concept—that is, as argued in Hegel’s Idealism, the Concept just is thought’s self-consciousness of itself in thinking—we can put his point in a somewhat more familiar way as well.

Animals, for example (this point always seems to inspire response couched in terms of animals), can have very sophisticated differential responsivenesses to their environment, and clearly can be said to be able to make higher-order conceptual discrimination (same species/other species, food/not food, etc.), but, to speak a bit of McDowellese, not as such. It is a condition of use of a concept that the use is subject to a norm of correct and incorrect use, and that norm is internal to the concept. Or, in using a concept (and not just differentially responding), I must know I am discriminating in a way that may be wrong, and I know this in the use, not as a second-order reflection.

Now in perception (as opposed to judgments based on perception) the issue is different, but if the animal is a rational perceiver, we should say that the deployment of concepts in perceptual discrimination must be such that they are available for judgment or self-conscious use. Such capacities as judgment and self-consciousness are called into play in a way that can be redeemed if challenged, for example. (This too is different for nonrational animals.) This is, must be, already implicit in their being called into play in perceiving at all, and is not a subfaculty to which rationality is added on.

There is a self-referential component in any judgment or action too (“I think this, I act thus”), but it can be misleading to think that this is the same problem as “how does the first-person pronoun have sense, and thereby pick me uniquely out.” As we shall see, it is misleading because it suggests a punctuated moment of awareness, something that has a different temporal dimension, one connected to the open-ended character of rationality in believing and acting.

At the most general level, being a concrete subject is nothing over and above a consciousness of such concreteness, not a second-order awareness of concrete properties; at least this is so if we have the proper conception of subjectivity in mind. To be a Christian is to take oneself to be one. A necessary condition of being a professor is that one take oneself to be one. Being a professor is that consciousness, once the appropriate social role and its conditions exist. Being the agent of that deed is the consciousness of agency in the doing.15 So, for example:

The most important point for the nature of spirit is the relation, not only of what it implicitly is in itself to what it actually is, but of what it knows itself to be to what it actually is; because spirit is essentially consciousness, this self-knowledge is a fundamental determination of its actuality. (21.16)

Finally, there is little doubt that Hegel realized that apperception was not a kind of consciousness. In discussing Fichte, he says,

If other Kantians have expanded on the determining of the intended object by the “I” by saying that the objectifying of the “I” is to be regarded as an original and necessary deed of consciousness [Thun des Bewßtseins], so that in this original deed there is not yet the representation of the “I”—which would be only a consciousness of that consciousness, or itself an objectifying of that consciousness—then this objectifying deed, liberated from the opposition of consciousness, is closer to what may be taken simply as thinking as such. But this deed should no longer be called consciousness; for consciousness holds within itself the opposition of the “I” and its intended object which is not to be found in that original deed. The name “consciousness” gives it more of a semblance of subjectivity than does the term “thought,” which here, however, is to be taken in the absolute sense of infinite thought, not as encumbered by the finitude of consciousness; in short, thought as such. (SL 21.47–48)

Thought’s Self-Constitution
I understand the adverbial qualification to be suggested by Rödl’s discussion of what he calls an unmediated way of knowing, “from the inside,” not of some “other” or by any inner perception (in the spirit of the passage just quoted). Knowing from the inside (by being the knower) is

A way of knowing such that my first person reference is constituted by a relation I bear to the object—identity—by which I know it in this way.16

Or more precisely, “when I know an object in a first person way, I know it by being that object.”17

This question (“what exactly do I know besides what I believe by being the believer”) is the same question as: how can the self-relation inherent in all cognitive relation to the world, and in all action, which self-relation certainly has the form of a dyadic relation, not be a dyadic relation, but be the expression of an identity? Since self-consciousness is the structural feature of knowledge and action, everything depends on the right formulation and drawing the right implications. I know what I am doing not by identifying myself with the one acting, but by being the one acting. So how can such a Two also be One? We are in the middle of everything of significance in Hegel’s Logic, not to mention Fichte’s Wissenschaftslehre and Schelling’s early idealism. We are at the heart of the problem they called Identitätstheorie. (For example, in Fichte’s early versions of the Wissenschaftslehre, the possibility of the I’s or ego’s identification of itself in all its experiences mirrors the “division” at the heart of any statement of identity, a division that is also somehow not a division, as in the difference between “A is A,” and simply “A.” In fact, he argues, the very intelligibility of any statement of the law of identity presupposes the I’s self-identity and self-differentiation. A cannot be identified as A unless the “I” of the “first” A is the same as the “I” of the second A and knows it is. And since identity is the first principle of any possible intelligibility, the issue is, in the systematic sense, primordial.)18

This too is important to state carefully. Hegel scholars often assume that Hegel inherits “identity philosophy” from Schelling, and that it means “the identity of subject and object.” They then formulate various philosophically implausible versions of such an identity, such as that true reality is divine thought thinking itself, that objects are moments of this thought’s “intellectual intuition of itself.” But the Logic is not committed to anything remotely like this. As we shall see in more detail in a moment, in thinking of identity, Hegel is first of all thinking of self-consciousness in any consciousness, where the subject of knowledge is identical with itself, where there is no difference between the subject and the object of its knowledge; all of this as Rödl formulates it in his own terms. And Rödl is expressing a Hegelian thought when he says that this is not just a feature of an isolated problematic, a theory of self-consciousness. This unusual identity is constitutive of “theoretical thought” as such. Theoretical thought, he says, “is a reality that includes its subject’s knowledge of it.”19 So a subject’s knowledge “that and why she believes what she does, which she expresses in giving the explanation, is not a separate existence from what it represents. It includes and is included in the reality of which it is knowledge.”20

This has an important implication. The theoretical thought of any content cannot be understood as the momentary or punctated grasp of a solitary item. The thought of the content is also, is identical with, the thought of whatever reasons there are to delimit a concept in such a way and not some other, for example, the thought of discreteness in its contrast with continuity, or the thought of essence in its contrast with appearances. We are not thinking of discreteness if we cannot think of what such a notion excludes, presupposes, requires, if we have no idea how such discrete magnitudes could form a continuum. These are, for Hegel, reasons that differentiate it from its contrary, reasons that allow success in distinguishing the content from its complements or contraries. That the thought of the content is also the thought of my thinking it has this implication, is what that apperceptive element amounts to.

But now we can try to explain something that can sound very extreme which Rödl alludes to but does not develop. In a swipe at empiricism, he notes that thought has the power to be the principle of the existence of its objects. He does not say one object, thought itself, but all its proper objects. To some this will sound like Fichte, that the Ich, in positing itself, posits the nicht-Ich. That is absolutely right, but not in the sense in which it is usually understood. Consider this passage from the second introduction to the 1796/1799 Wissenschaftslehre (nova methodo), translated as Foundations of Transcendental Philosophy. The passage I am interested in follows a general claim that “The idealist observes that experience in its entirety is nothing but an acting on the part of a rational being.” There then follows a gloss on “the viewpoint of idealism.”

The idealist observes how there must come to be things for the individual. Thus the situation is different for the [observed] individual than it is for the philosopher. The individual is confronted with things, men, etc., that are independent of him. But the idealist says, ‘There are no things outside me and present independently of me.’ Though the two say opposite things, they do not contradict each other. For the idealist, from his own viewpoint, displays the necessity of the individual’s view. When the idealist says, ‘outside of me,’ he means ‘outside of reason’; when the individual says the same thing, he means ‘outside of my person.’

Or, in an even more summary claim from Fichte’s notes: “the I is reason.”

So to bring all this together:

Judgment is the consciousness of judgment.
But one is “conscious of judging” in an unusual way, by being the judger. Being the judger, believer, or thinker of anything is as if in answer to the question “what ought to be judged, believed, or thought in that way?”
This means, at the highest abstraction, that the thought (belief, assertion) of some content (like finitude or causality) is at the same time the thought of the reasons that are required for such an “answer.”
If the thought of objects (as a successful thought) is identical in this way with the thought of what is presupposed and required for such a determination, then there is a way of stating the identity of subject and object, or the Ich’s determination of the nicht-Ich in its positing of itself, that is captured in the quotation from Fichte just given.
The determination of the object as that object or that kind of object is at the same time the determination of the reasons (the subject’s reasons) to so determine it.
Finally, thought can also investigate what is generally presupposed, what is required, in order to judge anything, to think determinately any content. It does not learn these from experience, does not apprehend them as ideal objects.
It has to be said to give them to itself.
The record of some such attempts is The Science of Logic.
Since these metaconcepts are the forms of whatever can be truly said, and what is truly said is what is the case, they are the forms of reality.
Herein lies another lesson, though, in the difficulty of finding the right formulation. In his chapter 3, Rödl, in discussing the main features of this order, i.e., inferential relations (believing q because I believe p and p implies q), argues that such inferences themselves reveal that there must be a reason it is right to believe something other than because of an inference from something else one believes. This different way “will reveal the order under which I bring myself in asking what to believe.”21 He recalls his previous chapter on action, where he showed that a chain of practical instrumental reasoning terminates “in a finite end that no longer falls under the normative order under which the conclusion is brought, but is that order.”22 Likewise, he says now, in theoretical knowledge, “a chain of inferences must terminate in beliefs that no longer conform to, but are the order to which beliefs inferred from them conform.”23 Later he will say that “the order of inference is not self-standing.”24 Rather, “inference is governed by an order to which one conforms in acts of believing that something is the case that manifests a power of knowledge.”25 (This is a difficult sentence. The last clause could modify “order” or “acts of believing.” The ambiguity does not affect the point I want to make in the following paragraph.)

It cannot be the case that this moment that defines the rightness of the whole order of inferences is itself the content of a separate belief or representation. We would be heading straight for Lewis Carroll’s paradoxes of Achilles and the tortoise. It must be that what it is to determine what it is right to believe because of what else one believes is itself, just thereby, “to reveal the order under which I bring myself in asking what to believe.” And this in the same difficult-to-state way that judgment is the consciousness of judgment. And in just the same way that, being committed to the truth of a proposition, I am just thereby committed to the denial of everything inconsistent with it. The latter is not a separate inference I draw, on the basis of my first commitment. It is a dimension of the content of my first commitment. This is not to say I must be conscious of these implications and incompatibilities, but just that I could not be thinking that content were I not able to be responsive to such considerations. This is all so just as someone’s believing something and her thought that it is something right to believe “are the same reality.”26 (I understand Rödl to make something like this point himself, in an objection to Christine Korsgaard.)27

Reflection on these features of judging or believing or doing brings us back to our starting point.28 Their all being undertaken self-consciously means no one could be said to “just” assert, or just believe, or just act. Any such undertaking, if self-conscious, must be potentially responsive to the question of “Why?”; that is, to reasons. (An assertion is such a responsiveness; the latter is not a secondary or even distinct dimension of the former.) And it is at least plausible to say that the greater the extent of such potential responsiveness (or said another way, the greater the self-understanding), the “freer” the activity, the more I can be said to redeem the action as genuinely mine, back it, stand behind it.

The Concept as Self-Consciousness
Kant was well aware that with this notion of apperceptive judging he was breaking with the rationalist (and Lockean) notion of reflection as inner perception, and as we shall see, Hegel’s language is everywhere carefully Kantian in this respect.29 Since self-consciousness is the form of all possible knowledge and action, a great deal will hang on what we should call the appropriate “logic” of this self-relation, where we mean not what we intend when we turn our attention to ourselves, but in what relation to ourselves we are when we claim something or act.

The claim common to Kant and Hegel is that judging is apperceptive, and that this is a logical matter, a matter of the very concept of judging, and this because no act of judging, asserting to be the case, say, could be such an act if the subjective judging were not self-consciously judging. A stand cannot be taken on how things are as a matter of some propositional structure, or some logical relation as such. Someone must take such a stand, and they cannot do so without knowing that they are doing so. A propositional structure, considered on its own, represents nothing, claims nothing. Again, it is not at all easy to say what “self-consciously judging” amounts to,30 if the self-relation is not a two-place relation, as it is not. That is, to reiterate, the claim does not mean that some judger must be attending to her asserting then and there. That would be a reflective attending that would require its own account, and I could be said to be undertaking such an attending only if I did that self-consciously, knew what I was about. But what I am thinking or doing could not be asserting or doing if, for example, I could be surprised on being informed that I had in fact been asserting, or if I discovered it myself. For one thing, one can’t be asserting something without being available to the question: why are you asserting that? If in some unusual context, you were able to say, “I didn’t know I was asserting anything,” then you were not asserting anything (subject to the obvious qualifications about self-deception). And the qualification that thinking must be self-consciously thinking to be such a thinking means that the same unusual self-relation must hold for actions, doings. I can’t be writing a book on Hegel unless I am self-consciously writing—not writing and also attending to my act of writing. It wouldn’t be an act of writing except if done self-consciously, and even explicitly attending to my act of writing must itself be a self-conscious attending.31

There is an obvious corollary to this feature of judging or believing or doing. As noted, their all being undertaken self-consciously means no one could be said to “just” assert, or just believe, or just act. Any such undertaking, if self-conscious, must be potentially responsive to the question of “Why?”; that is, to reasons. And it is at least plausible to say that the greater the extent of such potential responsiveness (or said another way, the greater the self-understanding), the “freer” the activity, the more I can be said to redeem the action as genuinely mine, back it, stand behind it. We thus have formulated what Rödl rightly identifies as the heart of German Idealism, the principle “that self-consciousness, freedom and reason are one.”32

As cited in the preceding chapter, Hegel said that the subject matter of the Logic is thinking (Denken), understood as an activity (Tätigkeit), which means that thinking is the “active universal” (das tätige Allgemeine) or the “self-activating” (sich betätigende) universal, because the deed (Tat) or that brought about (Hervorgebrachte) is the universal (das Allgemeine). At the beginning of the logic of the Concept, Hegel glosses this activity in a way that also expresses a Kantian thought. That is, he rejects the idea of the judgment as the combination of independent concepts, subjects, and predicates, and insists instead that the relation between the determinacy of concepts and their roles in judgments is in effect one of identity; their determinacy is their role in judging. He has his own way of putting this, but I think the point is clear. He is trying to explain here what he means by saying that “the concept as such does not abide within itself [prozeßlos in sich verharrend] without development,” calling the concept instead “totally active,” in that it is always “distinguishing itself from itself.”

This sundering [Diremption] of the Concept into the distinction of its moments that is posited by its own activity is the judgment, the significance of which must accordingly be conveyed as the particularization [Besonderung] of the Concept. (EL §166Z, my emphasis)33

In Kant as well as in Hegel concepts are predicates of possible judgments, even the concepts or the categories, dependence on which is necessary for any empirical conceptual determination to be possible.34 This means that concepts cannot be independently “grasped” as determinate entities. Thinking that they could be produces what Hegel is forever calling “dead,” lifeless, static, “untrue” concepts. (This truth is part of what we are learning in the Seinslogik: learning that it is not possible to understand conceptual determinacy this way, all by assuming it is, and failing.) And this means that the logic of being can be deeply misleading, as if we are simply entertaining concepts as such, one by one.35 In trying to understand this claim, we can recall here the passage where Hegel claimed that the Gestalt, the form, of concepts was the form of the self, that in science, the truth is self-consciousness.

Concepts have the form of a self in this sense, that they are moments of apperceptive predication, self-conscious judging, just as the self is what it takes itself to be, just as I know what I am doing by being the doer. They are what they are taken to be, determined to be, in the interconnected practices of conceptual determination. This alone will be the source of the claim for “logical movement.” In the greater Logic, and through such logical movement, determinate judgment is said to be the “determining of the Concept through itself,” and is said to be “the realization [Realisierung] of the Concept, for reality [Realität] denotes in general the entry into existence as determinate being” (12.53). Or: concepts are determinate only by virtue of their roles in judgment, the “bringing to the objective unity of apperception,” in Kant’s definition.

So a concept like “essence,” for example, can be said to be delimitable as just that concept by virtue of its possible uses in various contrasts with “appearance” or by virtue of its negation (in the grand structure of the SL) of the concept “being,” or its role in distinguishing accidental from essential predicates. These are all roles in judgments (and are thereby tied to judgmental roles in inferences). Any of these uses, though, involves any such claim in a network of justifications, a normative order. The application of any such concept in judgment, since apperceptive, self-consciously applied, must be, just thereby, responsive to its possible misapplication, and the question of the general contours of its correct use implicates any one notion in the normative proprieties governing many others. Hence, as we shall see, the course of the “movement” of the Logic.

Brandom has pointed out just what a radical alteration this all is from the Cartesian or representational model of intelligibility as such. Descartes had a much more abstract (eventually symbolic) conception of representation than the empiricists, but he had to hold that since we know what we know representationally, we cannot know our own representations that way without a regress. We must know them immediately, just by having then, or in his terms certainly. Whereas:

Kant has a new model of intelligibility: to be intelligible is to have a content articulated by concepts. It is the concepts applied in an act of awareness (apperception) that determine what would count as successfully integrating that judgment into a whole exhibiting the distinctive synthetic unity of apperception.36

And this is what Brandom means by apperception.

Awareness is apperception. The minimal unit of apperception is judgment. To judge is to integrate a conceptually articulated content into a constellation of commitments exhibiting the distinctive synthetic unity of apperception. Doing that is extruding from the constellation commitments incompatible with the judgment being made and extracting from it inferential consequences that are then added to that constellation of commitments. This is a process that is mediated by the relations of material incompatibility and consequence that relate the concepts being applied in the judgment to the concepts applied in other possible judgments.37

This seems to me ultimately an implication of the apperceptive character of judgment, but as formulated it seems to involve some reflection on what else I am committed to if I am committed to p, a “further” realization. The impression is of a moment like: “Well, I assert p. Now what have I gotten myself into?” It somewhat deemphasizes the fact that Kant and Hegel want to insist on an unusual self-relation in relation to any articulated content (see the section below), and at some basic level (the level Brandom calls the “meta-conceptual framework of reason” in Hegel), and only at that level, this relation is inherently self-negating, and so not just a matter of extruding incompatibilities whenever, if ever, they arise. Brandom’s account is a general account of the nature of conceptual content in empirical, in mathematical, in theoretical concepts, and it is surely Hegelian in its inspiration. But, as he freely concedes, it does not (yet) distinguish the unique claims of the concepts treated in the Logic.

I put it this way (“yet”) because Brandom is well aware of the differences between “ground level” concepts and “higher level speculative concepts” and thus far wants to point out only that any understanding of the latter requires “applying the lessons” learned at the former level and has not yet suggested how that application goes. He does say, in his Munich lectures,

What he calls “speculative,” or “logical” concepts are theoretical philosophical metaconcepts whose distinctive expressive role it is to make explicit features of the conceptual contents and use (the semantics and pragmatics) of those ground-level concepts.38

In fact, he claims that the importance of this distinction has been unappreciated.

I think this aspect of Hegel’s thought has not been much remarked upon because of a failure to keep two sets of books: one on his views of determinate empirical and practical concepts, the other on the logical, speculative, philosophical metaconcepts whose distinctive expressive job it is to make explicit what is going on when we apply the ground-level concepts.39

But in his formulations we are at two removes from the Logic’s treatment of these speculative concepts.

In these lectures I have focused on what Hegel will have to say about the semantics and pragmatics of the concepts deployed and determined through base-level experience, by way of preparation for understanding the course of the experience of meta-level self-consciousness that he recollects for us in the body of the Phenomenology.

This promises to get us from an explanation of the conceptual content of and the role in veridical experience of bent sticks and red squares and the like, to “the thing and its properties,” or “force” or “reason” or “Geist,” but these are linked to Geist’s experience of itself in its engagement with the world and with others. And, as Brandom lucidly explains, experience involves a distinction between “for consciousness” and “in itself.” That distinction is not relevant to the treatment of the very possibility of intelligibility in the Logic. Accordingly, it is not clear what the bearing of this investigation of the Phenomenology has on concepts like finitude, continuity, essence, ground, and the like, which are not, in any even metaconceptual sense, experiential, and are not treated by Hegel as retrospective comments on empirical discovery and meaning change. It is not that there is just another step to be taken. The question is whether Brandom has given us the resources to take that step. I discuss this issue in more depth in the next chapter.

Logical Infinity: Kantian Origins
Moreover, a proper understanding of the self’s relation to itself in thinking, the form of any conceiving and thereby any concept, and thereby any inferential relation, is also the core meaning of what Hegel calls the “infinity” treated by speculative philosophy (EL §28A),40 in contradistinction to (traditional) metaphysics, the domain of Verstand and finitude (EL §27). Later in the EL, Hegel states Kant’s point in his own speculative language.

What is here called object of reason, the unconditioned, is nothing but the self-equivalent [das Sich-selbst-Gleiche]; in other words, it is the original identity of the I in thinking. (§45)

This is yet again not an easy thought: some sort of self-relation that is not a two-place relation, but something like a circular structure, in which the self’s self-relation never terminates in a distinct object or determinate posit, but in so attending, returns to itself as relating. (The relation is to a “self” that is the original subject of the relation: a relation, or a difference, even with such an identity, to insert Hegel’s frequent way of framing the issue.) This is “infinity” in the proper sense, Hegel tells us frequently,41 and, as he says in his discussion of “Being-for-self,” “Self-consciousness is thus the nearest example of the presence of infinity.” (SL 21.145).42

With this topic of “infinity,” we are at the very limits now of being able to follow Hegel, at least at my limits. It would be reasonable to say that, formulated this way, the structure of this nondyadic self-relation (that is nevertheless a relation) is impossible to understand in any systematic way (and by hypothesis that would mean understanding the possibility of intelligible knowing and acting), and the impossibility represents the failure of German Idealism. This is Dieter Henrich’s claim.43 We could conclude from this, either that we have made a wrong turn somewhere and must begin anew, or that the issue itself—or the complex of issues, self-relation in relation to the world, self-knowledge, the sense of the first-person pronoun, personal identity—does not allow a systematic but only an “approximate” articulation. (The latter is also Henrich’s position.) Or we could hope that the problem in formulating this structure stems from the limitations inherent in a kind of formulation, say a Verstand formulation, and that a different conception of the “logic of thought, of intelligibility,” might be possible. This is, of course, Hegel’s position in The Science of Logic.

This framework issue prepares us for the even bolder passage that we have seen already.

It is one of the profoundest and truest insights to be found in the Critique of Reason that the unity which constitutes the essence of the concept is recognized as the original synthetic unity of apperception, the unity of the “I think,” or of self-consciousness.—This proposition is all that there is to the so-called transcendental deduction of the categories which, from the beginning, has however been regarded as the most difficult piece of Kantian philosophy. (SL 12.18)44

When one considers that Hegel just before this passage characterized his own non plus ultra, the concept, “when it has progressed to a concrete existence which is itself free,” as “none other than the ‘I’ or pure self-consciousness” (12.17),45 then it is clear that such claims promise a very great deal: not only a potential basis for an interpretation of what Hegel means by “der Begriff” in general, but also what he meant by another claim distinctive of his speculative philosophy that has bedeviled commentators for generations, that the concept gives itself its own actuality. For Hegel’s second sentence claims that once we understand that the unity which constitutes the essence of the concept is none other than the original synthetic unity of apperception, we will just thereby have already accomplished the task of the forbidding transcendental deduction, will have established the objective validity of the categories, or, in Hegelian terms, their actuality.

Interestingly, this already was something hinted at once by Kant, given that both Kant and Hegel understood concepts as predicates of possible judgments, and that for both judgment is the basic unit of self-conscious intelligibility. Hence Kant’s intimation of a one-step deduction when he claimed that the argument of the Deduction can be solved with

just as much ease, since it can almost be accomplished through a single inference from the precisely determined definition of a judgment in general (an action through which given representations first become cognitions of an object).46

Roughly, the thought behind such remarks is this. What Kant called the original synthetic unity of apperception is what Hegel calls “the essence of the unity of the concept.” This could be understood initially in a formal sense. Both unities are classic cases of “one-over-many.” Even an empirical concept, like red, remains identifiable as the same red, the same color, in all the many and various instances and shades in which it appears. Analogously, the manifold of experiences counts as a unity in all being ascribable to one I, that identical, selfsame I who has all such experiences. But both Hegel and Kant do not want to merely point out a structural analogy. The unity of apperception is the unity of a concept. That is, as Kant makes clear, to say that experience is always subject to the original synthetic unity of apperception is to say that it is always subject to the understanding, the power of conceiving. So this is the power to hold things together as one, necessary for experience to have a unity ascribable to an identical I. Discriminating what belongs together with what, what is connected to what in a temporal order, knowing that the successive perceptions of a house do not count as the perception of a succession in the world, requires an apperceptive unity; it does not just happen to consciousness. What happens is mere succession. Such a unity is possible only self-consciously, and it is the actualization of the power of conceiving. But the unity effected by the power of conceiving (where “conceiving” means more than merely thinking or associating together) is the representational unity that makes reference to an object possible. Unifying by “red” achieves the unity that says how things are. The rose belongs with the red things, not with what has seemed red-like to me before. Without this ability to distinguish how things are from how they seem to me, there would be as many “I’s” as associated seemings, and no unity of self-consciousness.47 Or, achieving the unity of self-consciousness is differentiating seeming from being, and so the rules for that distinction—categories—are constitutive of such unity. In other words, the “conditions of the possibility of experience are at the same time the conditions of the possibility of objects of experience.” Kant proposed an argument to show that any unity that could be said to be a product of affection alone, like an associative unity, presupposed what he called “a transcendental affinity,” that is, a power to distinguish a mere succession of representations from a representation of objective succession. Without that power, there could be no “one over many,” no manifold belonging to one I, one experiencer. Hegel does not rely on the subjective form of inner sense like this and argues, as above, that if we understand correctly that the unity of any concept is the unity of apperception, and that such a unity is what establishes a possible relation to an object, then the categories, as the moments of any such possible unifying power, will thereby be shown to be actual, to make possible representation of objects. Or, a rigorous Metaphysical Deduction, properly conceived, is the only deduction we need.48

Moreover, we need to take our bearings from Kant on the issue of what logic is and what relation it has to metaphysics, and how apperception fits in, because Hegel does, often, and he tells us why he does. In the very first sentence of the first preface of the greater Logic, Hegel unequivocally aligns himself with what he calls

the complete transformation that the ways of philosophical thought have undergone among us in the past twenty-five odd years, the higher standpoint in self-awareness that spirit has attained in this period of time (21.5)

and he complains only that this unmistakably Kantian “complete transformation” (völlige Umänderung) has not yet had the proper influence on “logic.” (In effect he will raise a Kantian objection to Kant, that he was not critical enough about his logical assumptions.)49 Likewise in the section The General Division of Logic, he stakes his claim as a post-Kantian with equal vigor and accuses post-Kantian philosophy of having fallen beneath the level of speculative truth attained by Kant.

I should point out that in this work I make frequent references to the Kantian philosophy (which to many might seem superfluous) because, whatever might be said here or elsewhere of its distinctive character or of particular parts of its exposition, it constitutes the foundation and the starting point of the new German philosophy, and this is a merit of which it can boast undiminished by whatever fault may be found in it. (21.46)

I think it is in this spirit that he tells us in that EL §24 we examined in the previous chapter that “logic coincides with metaphysics, with the science of things grasped in thoughts.”50

Metaphysics, after the “complete transformation” effected by Kant, is not the science of things, but the “science of things grasped in thoughts,” and it is to be distinguished from what used to be taken to be the case (before the Great Kantian Transformation)—that these thoughts were the essentialities of things, were themselves thing-like. Now this sounds confusing because we have just seen that Hegel talks this way himself, about Wesenheiten, so in the addition to EL §24 he proceeds immediately to clear this up. He insists that his position does not hold that what things really are are thoughts or thinkings, or that nature is somehow “petrified thought,” as Schelling held. There is no question that Hegel sides with Kant’s destruction of scholastic and rationalist metaphysics—rational psychology, cosmology, and theology—because he tells us exactly that, and that he agrees wholeheartedly with Kant that ontology is “now” possible only as “logic.”51 (In EL §47, Hegel goes further and expresses great gratitude to Kant for destroying the possibility that “philosophizing about spirit” should have anything to do with “soul things.” He goes on to say that the very question of whether the soul is simple or alterable is a category mistake.)52 Indeed, in the EL, the first thing he says about metaphysics in general is that it is ingenuous or naïve (unbefangen), because—and here Hegel gives his own version of the true critical project—it is unaware “of the antithesis of thinking within and against itself” (des Gegensatzes des Denkens in und gegen sich, EL §26).53 To forestall any impression that his own logic is continuous with rationalist metaphysics, Hegel requires an expression that avoids the impression that thoughts are kinds of things, or have fixed, self-related properties. (In EL§30, he characterizes metaphysical notions as “representations” because they assume “ready made subjects” (fertig gegebene Subjekte). So he suggests “thought-determinations” (Denkbestimmungen), a phrase that at least opens up the question of the “determining” activity that results in such determinations, the course of the “movement” of the SL. And of course we need to remember again the formulation quoted earlier, “As science, truth is pure self-consciousness as it develops itself and has the shape of the self” (21.33).

Conceptual Activity
Our question is the relation between logic and metaphysics in Hegel’s SL, and we are taking our bearings from the relation between self-conscious judging in Kant and what Kant called the “objective validity of the categories.” The attempt has been to understand the Kantian claim about apperception as a logical, not psychological claim, and this goes some way toward understanding the link between this reflective character of judging as the essence of intelligibility and “the intelligibles.” If it is possible to establish that certain a priori judgments have such objectivity, but without Kant’s limitation thesis, restricting that thesis to possible objects of sense experience (phenomena, not noumena), we will have a way into Hegel’s claim that logic can be understood as metaphysics. Our claim about Kant was that even for him, this relation to objects is not established by the imposition of subjective form onto received sensory material. Kant’s position is not ‘impositionist’ in this sense, and both he and Hegel are following the nonimpositionist, more Aristotelian (hylomorphic) line. We have already quoted the “same function” passage from the Critique of Pure Reason A79, and there are others of the same tenor. At B138, in the second-edition transcendental deduction, Kant writes,

The synthetic unity of consciousness is therefore an objective condition of all cognition, not merely something I myself need in order to cognize an object but rather something under which every intuition must stand in order to become an object for me.

And he works hard to insist that this is not turning the question of objectivity into the question of subjectively necessary unity.

For, e.g., the concept of cause, which asserts the necessity of a consequent under a presupposed condition, would be false if it rested only on a subjective necessity, arbitrarily implanted in us, of combining certain empirical representations according to such a rule of relation. I would not be able to say that the effect is combined with the cause in the object (i.e., necessarily), but only that I am so constituted that I cannot think of this representation otherwise than as so connected; which is precisely what the skeptic wishes most, for then all of our insight through the supposed objective validity of our judgments is nothing but sheer illusion. (B167–68)

As we discussed earlier, Hegel thinks of anything’s principle of intelligibility, its conceptual form, in the same way, as an actualization, the being-at-work or energeia of a kind of thing’s distinct mode of being, not as a separable immaterial metaphysical object. We can even say that Hegel’s presentation of judgment is one

according to which the act of finite subjectivity that is the act of judging as Kant describes it is the mere phenomenal manifestation of an act of self-thinking and self-accomplishing which is that of being itself, considered in its totality.54

We need only remember that for Hegel this is the core of Kant’s own position once we give up any notion of separable contributions from sensibility and understanding, and give up referring to pure forms of intuition as species-specific and so “subjectivizing” and idealizing “limitations” on what we can know. If we do, we get the careful statements about the identity within difference of concept and being in and for itself with which we began chapter 2, and which evoke Kant’s Highest Principle of Synthetic Judgments. There is no indication that Hegel thinks that being or God has an apperceptive discursive intellect and that we are manifestations of it. We are manifestations of the finitude of Verstand and the possibility inherent in Verstand of the transcendence of such self-imposed finitude. And all of these speculative identity claims have to be consistent with what Hegel tells us about the objectivity of concepts at the beginning of the logic of the Concept:

This is an objectivity which the subject matter consequently attains in the concept, and this concept is the unity of self-consciousness into which that subject matter has been assumed; consequently its objectivity or the concept is itself none other than the nature of self-consciousness, has no other moments or determinations than the “I” itself. (12.18–19)

Where Hegel differs from Aristotle (and from Kant in a different way) is that he does not think the determinacy of this “it” can be settled by individual acts of intellectual apprehension, what he later called “empty identity or abstract universality” (12.22). This is something that follows from seeing them as moments in the I’s self-determination of its own possibility. They must also be understood as moments in a network of thought’s determination of its own possibilities, a vast claim we have yet to approach.

This should give us more purchase on the kind of passages quoted in the last chapter. To wit:

This concept is not intuited by the senses, is not represented in imagination; it is only subject matter [Gegenstand], the product and content of thought, the fact that exists in and for itself [die an und für sich seyende Sache], the logos, the reason of that which is, the truth of what we call things; it is least of all the logos that should be kept outside the science of logic. (SL 21.17)

And,

When thinking is taken as active with regard to objects as the thinking over [Nachdenken] of something, then the universal—as the product of this activity—contains the value of the matter [Wert der Sache], what is essential [das Wesentliche], inner, true. (EL §21)

In other words, we need a kind of stereoscopic vision to keep in mind two aspects of this issue that Hegel keeps stressing, and as complementary rather than conflicting. The first is that conceiving is an activity and concepts are “moments” of this activity. This is something stressed in a different way when Hegel tells us that concepts are not things, objects. The second is that, as just stressed, such activities are not actions, doings, and that Kant’s position, when properly understood (and so not as Kant understood it), should not be taken as a part of a two-step or impositionist account of such activity. The inseparability of concept and intuition is the contrary of such a position.

Similarly, the concept is also not to be considered here as the act of the self-conscious understanding, not as subjective understanding. (12.20)

The emphasis in this passage is thus on the distinctness of the understanding as a model of conceptual activity, and its Kantian status as subjective, imposing an order on what is given.55

The Objectivist Hegel?
I noted at the outset that Hegel tells us that two-thirds of the Logic, the Objective Logic, concerns, at least in part, Kant’s understanding of “transcendental logic.”56 (This is also broadly reflected in the structure of the Logic of Being, which has at its core a consideration of Kant’s categories of quality and quantity, and even Kantian subcategories like reality, negation, and limitation, and in the logic of essence, which tracks Kant’s consideration of the categories of relation and modality.57) But what is most important is that he also tells us that we should understand the import or result of this logic just as Kant did, as a critique of and a successor to what had been “metaphysics.”58

And he echoes and affirms Kant’s famous insistence that the proud name of ontology must give way to the more modest one of a transcendental analytic (A247/B304). Hegel says that (Kant’s) objective or transcendental logic “replaces,” stands in the place of (an deren Stelle . . . tritt), general metaphysics or ontology. Logic so construed also takes account of and replaces special metaphysics, the a priori doctrines of the soul, the world, and God. And finally Hegel pronounces on the justness of the Kantian critique of such enterprises in a strikingly direct way.

[Metaphysics] . . . therefore incurred the just reproach [den gerechten Vorwurf] that it employed the pure forms of thought uncritically, without previously investigating whether and how they could be the determinations of the thing-in-itself, to use Kant’s expression—or more precisely, of the rational.—The objective logic is therefore the true critique of such determinations—a critique that considers them, not according to the abstract form of the a priori as contrasted with the a posteriori, but in themselves according to their particular content. (SL 21.49)

These passages are so pellucid, it is hard to believe there is a controversy about Hegel’s debt to Kant’s metaphysics critique, but there is.59 Now, it is also true that these expressions of Kantian loyalties introduce a huge problem, one that will occupy us for the rest of this book in one way or another. If we think, as some do, of Hegel’s Denkbestimmungen as something like Fregean thoughts, objective in the Platonic sense, as abstract entities, then what I am quoting is very puzzling. Hegel certainly knows that Kant’s transcendental logic is in some sense or other a logic of subjectivity. He can’t be saying: I agree with Kant’s critique of school metaphysics, except for all the details of Kant’s critique, except for the basis on which the critique is grounded.60 What we will need is a Hegelian notion of objectivity and objective thoughts that is not inconsistent with what he is saying in these passages.

That is, given what Hegel has said about the temporal dimensions of the “movement” of the SL, for example that it even parallels the history of philosophy, it would be odd for Hegel to defend a position according to which such conceptual content is fixed and eternal, à la Frege.61 Fixed and eternal is exactly what he most of all does not want. The rough contrary idea will be: just as those Frege interpreters argue that there is no reason to go as far as the historical Frege did (a form of Platonism) to differentiate objective thought from mental episodes, private associations, etc., as “senses,” and just as we might explain understanding a sense not as grasping the same abstract object but as having come to have the capacities anyone would have to have to use the expression of that sense successfully (as when M. Dummett suggests parsing objectivity in Frege as possibly “intersubjectivity”), the same might be true of Hegelian objectivity.62 As the phrase above, “determinations of the rational,” indicates, Hegel would have no trouble affirming Frege’s claim,

So I understand by objectivity an independence from our sensing, intuiting and representing . . . but not an independence from reason.63

And it is certainly the case, as that “or more precisely, of the rational” indicates, that while Hegel accepts the justness of the Kantian charge against the “old metaphysics,” that it was “uncritical” in the Kantian sense, he does not accept the form of the Kantian critique. In a claim we shall have to return to and investigate, he repeats often that the true critical question is not whether subjective forms of thought have any objective purchase, but whether the concepts of a logic “in and for themselves” provide what they are supposed to provide: what is required for successful conceptual determination. In both sections of the objective logic, we will find that they do not (or rather partly do and partly do not). So when conceptual determination is understood as it is in the logic of being and in the logic of essence, the resources available to the conceptual forms themselves will turn out to be inadequate to make the distinctions and hold them stable, the ones that, at any point in the journey, we have determined we have to be able to make. A simpler way to put the point is the way Hegel does early on in the SL: Kant did not sufficiently investigate what these pure concepts are; he did not pursue the question of their “nature” and their very possibility.64 All of this by way of saying that there is no question that in Hegel’s eyes, the charge of subjectivity or finitude against the Kantian position must be earned. And, as he states in EL §25, it is by means of the development of unavoidable “antitheses” in such determinations that this subjectivity or finitude will be shown.65

Commentators are sometimes so eager to observe the spirit of this sort of critique of Kantian “subjectivism” that they assume that the Logic is something like the “pure” manifestation of the objective dependence and implication relations among “pure essentialities,” thoughts in the objective sense, logical entities that are in those relations in ways that have nothing to do with anyone “thinking them.” The worry among such objectivists was stated very well by Dieter Henrich in 1971, in a criticism of Kuno Fischer’s version of logic. Any interpretation, Henrich insisted, that explains the movement of the Logic in terms of the being-thought, or the thinking of thoughts (and our insistence on concepts as predicates of possible apperceptive judgments would be a prime offender) conflates the method of the Phenomenology with the Logic. Now it is certainly true that the reflective enterprise that propels the Logic should not be confused with what Hegel would call “external reflection” (something like selecting a concept and trying to define it). And it is certainly true that Hegel writes,

This method is not something distinct from its subject matter and content—for it is the content [Inhalt] in itself, the dialectic which it possesses within itself, which moves the subject matter forward. It is clear that no expositions can be accepted as scientifically valid that do not follow the progression of this method and are not in tune with its simple rhythm, for it is the course of the subject matter itself [Gang der Sache selbst]. (SL 21.38)

But the apperceptive or inherently reflexive determination of conceptual content—in the later language of the SL, a positing, and then ultimately determining reflection—is no more external than the “I think” is external to a content thought. Judgment and the consciousness of judgment are one act. No content represents anything except as thought/judged. This will be crucial in avoiding what would seem to be a reflective paradox in the Logic’s project: that the forms of pure thinking supposedly under investigation are also necessary to do the investigating.

So Henrich’s worry and the similar worries of those who follow him manifest several confusions. They first conflate the phenomenological experience (Erfahrung) of some norm, as such experience is treated in the PhG (what it is like, from the first-person perspective, to attempt to account for something or justify some deed, within the boundaries of some putative, finite norm), with the pure thinking, thinking as such, the moments of reason, in the Logic.66 The movement of pure thought is like the movement in a proof, on the assumption that the moves are inferences a thinker, on pain of contradiction, must make, and not merely formal-structural functions, as in a symbolic logic. This is what Hegel means when he characterizes the logical dimension of subjectivity:

the concept that has carried itself out [sich selbst ausgeführt] in its objectivity, or the object that is inner purposiveness, essential subjectivity [wesentliche Subjektivität]. (EL §214A)

Expressed in a different terminology, it is also question-begging to assume that anyone who makes the assertoric force inseparable from the logical structure of the unit of meaning (as Hegel unquestionably does) is thereby guilty of psychologism, or of relying on some “experiential” standard of adequacy. Even Frege was willing to make the question of assertoric force a part of “logic” in his own terms.67 In this respect, though, there is something quite relevant from the Phenomenology, the remarks on the “speculative sentence” in its preface.

The proposition ought to express what the true is, but essentially ‘the true’ is subject. As this subject, it is merely the dialectical movement, this course of self-engendering, advancing, and then returning into itself. (PhG §65)

Whatever this ultimately means, it clearly distinguishes something like the inspection of logical structure from the true bearer of Hegel’s notion of truth, the movement of judgmental activity.68 Moreover, if we follow Henrich’s advice, we end up with the position he in fact attributes to Hegel, that the Logic concerns the development or movement of the objects of the logical science.69 But this—objects moving about—is a mystification. At any rate, I have no idea what it would be to “observe” one thought-object developing into another.70 (We don’t observe what happens when one step in a proof “becomes” another; the inference has to be drawn, and drawn for a reason.) Such an objectivism makes it almost impossible to understand what Hegel calls the Logic’s inner “drive” or Trieb (or the comment just quoted, that “the true is subject”),71 and it especially does not take account of the claim that conceptual form is itself apperceptive, that “the truth is self-consciousness.” (The SL after all is the “science of pure thinking,” not the science of pure thoughts.) Essentialities do not move or establish relations with other essentialities, any more than modus ponens describes “what happens” in thought, or what one phenomenologically experiences, when p → q and p are both true and taken to be true. But acknowledging that does not mean that the objective thought p → q and the objective thought p “become” the objective thought q. What could that mean?72

The general picture here seems to be a propositional attitude point of view, in which thought contents are self-standing, complex objects, which can then become the objects of various attitudes like believing or asserting. But Hegel is pre-Fregean, and has no trouble regarding the assertoric force as essential to the identity of the content thought. A proposition cannot be the bearer of truth, does not even represent any state of affairs, except as judged, and therewith the identity of the acts of thinking involve a wide variety of other commitments at the same time, something that cannot be explained in a “propositionalism.”73 (I mean such things as being committed to the denial of all judgments inconsistent with the one that one asserts as true, and this not as a second act of thought.) By contrast, the basic unit of intelligibility for Hegel is not an internally complex object, even if in relations with other objects, but as he says in many ways and many different times, a result, the accomplishment of the “active universal,” which activity is judging. The Absolute itself is said to be a result.

So this is the objectivist temptation I think we most need to resist. It is what Hegel himself is trying to avoid when he spends so much time delimiting the topic of “thinking” from any psychological connotation, both here and in the Encyclopedia’s very different treatment of thinking in psychology. And such an objectivist approach flies in the face of Hegel’s frank admission of the role of subjectivity in the movement of the Logic (once we understand its nonpsychological status), even the form of subjectivity treated in the Phenomenology, Geist. Here is a claim Hegel makes “as a logician,” let us say.

The understanding determines, and holds the determination fixed. Reason is negative and dialectical, since it dissolves the determinations of the understanding into nothing; it is positive, since it generates the universal, and comprehends the particular therein. Just as the understanding is usually taken as something separate from reason in general, so also dialectical reason is taken as something separate from positive reason. In its truth reason is however spirit, which is higher than both reason bound to the understanding and understanding bound to reason. (SL 21.8)

These are all supposed to be logical claims, as Hegel understands logic. He here even identifies a modality of thinking activity essential to the identity of the logical moments that he sets out elsewhere: determination and the understanding; dialectic and reason; spirit and speculation. All this even though spirit is not a category of the logic. The mode of logical connection is inseparable from the mode of connecting. They are co-constituting.

One nicely Hegelian formulation of what this amounts to is in fact given by Frege.

Not everything is an idea. Otherwise psychology would contain all the sciences within it, or at least it would be the supreme judge over all the sciences . . . Neither logic nor mathematics has the task of investigating minds and the contents of consciousness owned by individual men. Their task could perhaps be represented rather as the investigation of the mind; of the mind, not of minds.74

Perfect Hegelianism. Now of course it is also true that “metaphysics” can be understood in any number of ways, and nothing so far cited by Hegel would be inconsistent with some claim that this “new logic” that Hegel is proposing coincides with a new metaphysics. Indeed, there is an obvious undeniable sense in which what Hegel is doing can be described as metaphysical. Manifestly, Hegel has philosophical views on the nature of human agency (on what it is), on freedom, necessity, the nature of nature and the nature of spirit, the nature of universality, what a human individual consists in, and so forth. The Logic is certainly an account of “the nature of thinking.” The only point at issue here is that our citation of passages has shown that Hegel identifies the old metaphysics with what Kant opposed (“ontology” in the pre-Kantian sense, and a priori doctrines of the soul, the world, and God), that he agrees that Kant replaced these notions with a transcendental logic, and that Kant was right that the old metaphysics was “uncritical,” could not explain how it knew what it claimed to know, even though Kant misformulated the true “critical” problem as the problem of the objective validity of subjective concepts.75 The interpretive point to take away from such passages is just that no interpretation of Hegel can be successful that is not consistent with these remarks about the old metaphysics and the new logic (especially the implications that follow from the self-conscious character of judgment). In order to be consistent, what we will be interested in in Hegel’s metaphysics is what role, say, a putative concept of agent such as a natural-causal account could play in a satisfying explanation of the bodily movements we want to attribute to someone in a context where that explanation must be consistent both with others already established and with specific desiderata, or whether a notion of freedom as uncaused causality can cohere with what else we require in the network of notions like responsibility, control over the future, blame, or whether we have given any account of anything by appealing to “being.” Said another way, a strong way of insisting that Hegel’s new “metaphysics” is a logic, none of any of this has to do with what anything is made of, consists in, with the furniture of the universe. What we want to know, pace Hegel, about these concepts is their “logic,” how they function with account-givings governed by the norms of explanatory satisfactoriness and truth.

I conclude the following: to consider objects in terms of their possible intelligibility requires an account of conceptual determination. Concepts are understood as possible “moments” of judgment; their determinacy derives from their role in judgments. They are predicates of possible judgments, and this rendering intelligible occurs most clearly but not exclusively (and not ultimately in speculative knowledge) in the act of predication. Such an account presupposes specific assumptions both about what it is to render intelligible (to judge, to conceptualize), and about the proper objects of thought. Any (particular and limited) version of such thinking must assume such thinking to be apperceptive, implicitly self-conscious, even if from the point of view of the position under analysis, this is not acknowledged. And for Hegel this is a logical claim (about what could count as thinking a thought), not a psychological one, or a metaphysical one (what sort of event is thinking?). This means that any concept of thinking and of the content of thought involves normative proprieties, exclusions, and implications, without which any thinking a thought could not be the thinking and the thought it is. These normative commitments are independent of what a thinker might herself at some moment be able to acknowledge, but they cannot be denied on being noticed, on pain of incoherence, of not thinking anything at all. A simple example is that anyone committed to the truth of a proposition is committed to the denial of every proposition inconsistent with that proposition. That denial is not a separate step that requires its own justification. This feature of thinking is central to The Science of Logic’s own development, and that provides us with our next topic. That development essentially involves a demonstration that commitment to a categorical determination, at a given stage of incomplete self-consciousness about what such determination involves, requires a commitment to a thought that appears inconsistent with, “antithetical” to, the original commitment. The “engine” of the Logic’s motion is thus negation, in particular a form of self-negation that Hegel thinks he has identified in a way that marks his signal contribution to these sets of issues. That is the notion we have to look at next, at least for some preliminary orientation.