9
# THE TRUE AND THE GOOD
The Concept of the Concept
The structure for our final topic in this investigation of Hegel’s identification of speculative logic and metaphysics is neatly presented in this passage from the Encyclopedia Logic.

The idea, as a process, runs through three stages in its development. The first form of the idea is life, i.e. the idea in the form of immediacy. The second form is then that of the mediation or the difference [Differenz], and this is the idea as knowing which appears in the twofold shape of the theoretical and the practical idea. The process of knowing has, as its result, the restoration of the unity, enriched by the difference, and this yields the third form of the hereby absolute idea, the final stage of the logical process that proves itself to be at once the truly first and the only being-through-itself-alone [nur durch sich selbst Seiende]. (EL 215A)1

That last unusual phrase refers to the autonomy of pure thinking, or to reason’s self-authorization, and, as the title of this study reminds us, this is not an account of any special ontological domain or object, but is an account of the nature of all possible account-givings and thereby of anything that could be the subject of an account, or of being’s intelligibility in itself. (In this sense, at this level of abstraction, the subject matter could be said to be the “shadow” of the contingent, empirical world.) The subject matter that will close the book is just this self-determination itself and its status, or logic as metaphysics, brought to full self-consciousness: the rendering intelligible of intelligibility itself. And in the Science of Logic, there is a final formulation of this identity claim.

The idea is the adequate concept, the objectively true, or the true as such. If anything has truth, it has it by virtue of its idea, or something has truth only in so far as it is idea. (12.173)

The initial explanation of the idea in the introductory section of the SL will allow us to see, if also a bit dimly at first, why life should be understood as the immediate manifestation of the idea in a way that will be more fully realized in the two modalities of knowing, and then realized as absolute idea.

But since the result now is that the idea is the unity of the concept and objectivity, the true, we must not regard it as just a goal which is to be approximated but itself remains always a kind of beyond; we must rather regard everything as being actual only to the extent that it has the idea in it and expresses it. It is not just that the subject matter, the objective and the subjective world, ought to be in principle congruent with the idea; the two are themselves rather the congruence of concept and reality; a reality that does not correspond to the concept is mere appearance, something subjective, accidental, arbitrary, something which is not the truth. (12.174)

The attempt in this study has been to explain everything “actual” as “having and expressing the idea” as that identity between logic and metaphysics, where logic is understood as self-constituting, and metaphysics as the account of the intelligibility of the world in the sense prominent in Aristotle.2 It is also true, however, that this last non-correspondence of concept and reality takes in all of the finite world, the world we want to know and on which, in which, we act. There are degrees of intelligibility, and the intelligibility of objects that depend on various possible contingent dependencies and manifold relation to other objects is of a much lower degree than that of organic beings and, finally, of the concept itself. Quite usefully for our purposes later in this chapter, one of Hegel’s main examples throughout the SL and in other works of “the concept in its actuality as idea” is the political state, no real instance of which fully realizes its concept, but any instance of which, if it is a state, is also “what it is” by means of its concept. Its being on the way to full realization and its already being an actual state are quite consistent, as we would expect in a modern Aristotelian.

The relationship between concept and individual, as explored in the last part of the life section, is supposed to have introduced us to the final exfoliation of that relationship itself, of conceptuality in the metaphysical sense—that a pure concept is not a class concept under which instances fall, but the “truth” of any object. In the simplest sense, organic beings reproduce according to kind; their life-activity in general, including reproduction, is “for” its concept, for its specific form of life, in the sense that such activity can go well or poorly. Because this process of striving self-realization is never more than this process but always in the process of living, a being’s life is never simply “achieved.” The life-form itself, the species, perdures beyond the death of any individual, and this will be a valuable element in understanding the absolute idea.

The idea, on account of its immediacy, has singularity for the form of its concrete existence. But the reflection within it of its absolute process is the sublating of this immediate singularity; thereby the concept, which as universality is in this singularity the inner, transforms externality into universality, or posits its objectivity as a self-equality. (12.177)3

A living being is “for” its kind (it does what it does to realize the life-form it is), and its mere individuality is “sublated.” (No living being can lead its life as individually determined, as if everything about its life were “up to it.” It is the life-form it is, the universal.)

So in this sense, what specifies the realization of its life is always other than such an individual life—it must always work, strive to live—and in so being a manifestation of the idea at work becoming itself and already having become itself, being a living being, it introduces us to the structure of knowing, a striving self-realization that does not achieve what would be the end of such striving—complete wisdom—and that focuses self-conscious attention on this logical structure of our knowing, and how one comes to know it by working through the opposition and differentiation characteristic of the subject-object relation in its finitude. (This characteristic is what we know in knowing the Absolute Idea, not the completed knowledge of content. The “realm of shadows” metaphor is relevant again.) Life is presented as the model for understanding the object-concept relationship at the heart of knowing, since it is living being which, in its species form, can be said to self-determine the specific birth-nourishment-“irritability” (differential responsiveness to its environment)-growth-aging-death natural life cycle.

The identity of the idea with itself is one with the process; the thought that liberates actuality from the seeming of purposeless mutability and transfigures it into idea must not represent this truth of actuality as dead repose, as a mere picture, numb, without impulse and movement, as a genius [Genius (sic)] or number, or as an abstract thought; the idea, because of the freedom which the concept has attained in it, also has the most stubborn opposition within it; its repose consists in the assurance and the certainty with which it eternally generates that opposition and eternally overcomes it, and in it rejoins itself. (12.177)

It will be very important to note this strange-sounding process of “generating an opposition” and “eternally” overcoming it when we come to Hegel’s account of theoretical and practical knowledge. Each will have this same structure.4

Said in a more Aristotelian way, a living being’s form, its principle of intelligibility, is its norm, not just a means of classification. This norm can be realized poorly or well. This is the way we should understand the relation between objects in general and the Concept. (This does not amount to any suggestion that Hegel thinks we should view everything as alive, because every being’s truth is its concept. The domain of relevance implied by the results of the SL is first of all the domain of philosophy, that is, the nonempirical attempt to say what is, for those objects about which we can say nonempirically what they are: Geist, the state, friendship, art, religion.) Or, said in a Kantian way, pure concepts are constitutive of objecthood itself, not empirical classifications. In knowing this constitutive relationship, we acknowledge both the identity of conceptuality with determinate being, and the speculative nature of this identity, that is, the difference or “opposition” remaining within this identity. Any finite thing can be known to be what it is only by knowing it as its concept, even though as finite, it is not, never will be, fully its concept, and the full articulation of its concept is not possible. That is what it means to say it is finite. And in just this sense, knowing can genuinely be knowing, even if not being absolute knowing.5

So the topic is “cognition” (Erkennen), the status of knowing the “object-in-its-concept” itself, in both this identificatory and differentiating sense. More properly, in the appropriate philosophical register, we should say that what we want is to understand, not to know in the modern scientific sense, that is, to explain.6 When we understand something, we understand its cause, but in the Aristotelian sense, we mean we know why it is what it is, its mode of being. And this knowledge does not then ground explanation; it is self-standing. (Hegel is not leading us to: “Why does it rain?” “Because it is in the nature of rain to water the crops.”)7 As just noted, Hegel introduces us to this final reflection by discussing the different dimensions of life as self-conscious life, or, he now says, spirit, a self-directed life that has itself for its object (even a plant can be said to “lead” its life, in the sense in which what it requires and what harms it are determined “by it,” by the requirements of its life-form, or “internally,” but all of this not as such, consciously), and so is both differentiated from itself and identical with itself, the structure we explored in chapter 3. Any proper subject of philosophical interrogation, like right, or art, or religion is going to be “self-directing” in this sense. Any instance must be understood as unavoidably involved in any such object’s fully realizing itself, fully becoming what it is. This, its not being fully what it is, is why it in its very being also “generates opposition” and striving. Hegel wants to pursue here, though, only the “idea of life,” that is, spirit, as he says, “in the form that pertains to this idea as logical” (12.197), and not in any of the other ways in which it could be considered, as soul, consciousness, spirit as such, that is, as it might be studied by the Philosophy of Subjective Spirit in the Encyclopedia, or even in the Phenomenology of Spirit. So thinking as such, self-conscious life (spirit so understood) is our subject now, in that “form that pertains to the idea as logical.” Pure thinking’s self-determination of what is necessary for any thinking to be the thinking of an object, and correspondingly, what any object must be such as to be thought, are now to be subject to one final turn of the self-consciousness screw: a reflection on the logical nature of the knowing, and, we shall find, the doing, that have made up the moments of this self-determination. Hegel then sets out what he regards as various dimensions of the specific Erkenntnis proper, say, to the determination of what art or religion or the state is. These include analytic and synthetic cognition, definition, division, theorem, all the moments he considers possible for “the advance of cognition based on concept determination” (12.221, my emphasis), that sort of understanding, and the relations among particularity, singularity and universality. But for us, the most interesting contribution of the life section is its bearing on a last form of concept-actuality “identity,” a new topic, practical knowing.

In doing this, we return to the most frequently stressed characteristic of thinking, self-consciousness, and its speculative logic, both self-differentiating and self-identical. (Judging is the judging of objects, of what is other than thought, and is always also consciousness of judging, but not as a separate moment. The one moment, thinking, is itself dual, but not to be understood as the duality of thinking and its objects. Acting has the same self-conscious structure. I am not acting if I am not aware of my acting, and this in no sense as a self-observation.) Hegel puts this point in the EL by saying that, even though the idea now “has itself for an object,” even though the moments in which subjective universality and objective content are “in themselves identical,” “they are not yet posited as identical” (EL §223, my emphasis). The activity by which thinking seeks to posit this identity (of itself and its other) is called knowing, and its form is most familiar to us in finite knowing. Thinking’s attempt to understand itself as “the truth” of what is other than thought, being, is knowing in both its finite and its speculative moments.

Yet there is another way in which the opposition and striving for overcoming opposition characteristic of knowing manifest themselves. Thinking can either overcome any opposition of being to knowing, by transforming itself in the light of its “certainty” or “absolute faith in this capacity to posit the identity,” can understand itself as transforming itself internally, at the level of abstraction and with the right notion of internal necessity, to constitute what it could be to know and to be a world, or transform the world in order to “overcome the one-sidedness of subjectivity” (EL §225). The semblance of objectivity—that some being is the “actuality” it presents itself as—can be penetrated, understood not to be such an actuality, and transformed by “the drive of the good to bring itself about” and by “willing, the practical activity of the idea” (ibid.), another and perhaps the most obscure “two sides of the same coin” claim. (We are not much prepared for the “drive of the good to bring itself about,” except by the structural analogy with the life process: here, that, likewise, the good is actual and “eternally” becoming actual.) What Hegel wants to say, and where all the interesting controversy begins, is that just as in knowing, the process is “making the object one’s own,” or overcoming its alienness, by discovering the reality of reason or logos in the world, realizing itself as the world’s logos, and not by reason’s transforming itself as if in response to, or in order to mirror, an independent world, as in the empiricist picture,8 so in practical knowing, the subject does not face the world as an alien element that must be transformed on the basis of a subjective demand descending wholly from pure practical reason. Practical knowing consists both in acknowledging the “reality of the good” and in participating in the world’s own constant realization of its “purpose” by acting.

This is the source of the most persistent and, given what he says, most understandable criticism of Hegel: that the “reconciliation” he promises, this last manifestation (here as aspiration), seems wildly idealistic and unreasonable, and that it is based on the idea of the world’s having a purpose, indeed a realized purpose, which has zero credibility today, especially after the twentieth century. This is so, even though the animus that is driving Hegel is also clear enough and not improbable. As Hegel constantly insists in various contexts, it is impossible that a practical assessment of “what ought to be” could be derived formally from practical reason alone. Material assumptions in any such attempted derivation must be and are present, are usually hidden, and reflect a specific historical context. We need to know something material about human beings to make any progress, and human beings being historical, some sort of practical knowledge is necessary to determine any rightful relation to others, a knowledge of practical reality inseparable from an assessment of what is to be done. (“The idea of the good can therefore find its completion only in the idea of the true” [12. 233].)9 So we should look carefully at what Hegel says, in this last attempt to convince us of the speculative identity of thought, now practical thinking about the practically real and what is to be done, with the world.

Hegel first summarizes the commonsensical view.

While what matters for intelligence is merely taking the world as it is, the will, by contrast, is bent on making the world what it ought to be. The immediate, what it finds before it, counts for the will, not as a fixed being, but instead only as a semblance [Schein], as something in itself vacuous. Here those contradictions come to the fore in which one stumbles around on the standpoint of morality. (EL §234A)

This contradiction is supposed to consist in the will’s striving for a realization that would be the end of the will’s activity if it succeeded. We can leave aside the question of why this should be a contradiction (Hegel has plenty of other things to say elsewhere about why such a conception of a pure ought applied to an alien practical actuality, the world of institutions, practices, communities and subcommunities, is incoherent.) The important issue for us is his positive account of practical knowing and its “reconciliation,” the practical version of the identity of logic, or thinking, and being that we have been investigating. This is the key passage.

The reconciliation [Versöhnung] consists in the fact that the will, in its result, returns to the presupposition of knowing, that is to say, it consists in the unity of the theoretical and practical idea. The will knows [weiß] the purpose as its own and the intelligence construes the world as the actual concept. This is the true posture of rational knowing. What is vacuous and vanishing makes up only the surface, not the genuine essence of the world. This is the concept, being-in-and-for-itself, and the world is thus itself the idea. The unsatisfied striving disappears if we know that the final purpose of the world has been brought about and to the same degree eternally brings itself about [daß der Endzweck der Welt ebenso vollbracht ist, als er sich ewig vollbringt]. (EL §234A, my emphasis)

It is this last phrase, “eternally brings itself about,” that returns us to what we have already seen in the nature of life and that concept’s “immediate” introduction to the structure of philosophical knowledge, and that makes it impossible to ascribe to Hegel the claim that with the arrival of representative institutions, a market economy, the bourgeois family, romantic art, and Protestant Christianity, the “world’s purpose” simply has been achieved and may now only be contemplated in full reconciliation, or even that there is an “end of history.” If that were true, what would “eternally bringing it about,” not just having brought it about, refer to? He goes on:

This correspondence of is and ought, meanwhile, is not a frozen and inert correspondence; for the good, the final purpose of the world, is only in that it produces itself again and again, and the difference between the spiritual world and the natural world then consists in the fact that while the latter constantly only returns into itself, a progression also takes place in the former [während diese nur beständig in sich selbst zurückkehrt, in jener allerdings auch ein Fortschreiten stattfindet]. (Ibid., my emphasis)

The claim is that there is no way to understand the practical world, the social and political life created and maintained by Geist, except as manifesting a view of the good, and that that view calls for assessment about its relation to “the good,” the realization of human freedom. Without such attention and assessment, such a world would simply not have been understood. I note too that there would be no progression (Fortschreiten) if the “produces itself again and again” amounted only to repetition. That is, by explicit contrast, what life in the natural world would be.10 In the Lectures on the Philosophy of World History he makes this point in a more dramatic way.

This development [of the organic individual] progresses in an immediate way, without opposition and obstacle; nothing can intrude between the concept and its realization, between the nature of the germ as it is determined in itself, and its adequate existence. But in spirit, it is different. The transition from its destination [Bestimmung] to the realization of it is mediated through consciousness and will . . . the development, which is a tranquil emergence in nature, is a bitter and endless struggle against itself in the case of spirit. (VPG 76/77)11

We note again that this struggle is “endless.”

Obviously the difficulty here is somehow putting together the claim that the final purpose of the world has both been brought about and is nevertheless “eternally” in the process of bringing that purpose about, a phrase that resonates with the earlier claim about eternally generating self-opposition. We can add that Hegel thinks this purpose is the objective realization of human freedom both in the objective institutions of world history and in the understanding of pure thinking as wholly self-determining and autonomous in the SL. But that doesn’t help much with the “eternally bringing about” phrase.

It is at least clear that Hegel is making an implicit distinction between, on the one hand, distinctly practical reasoning, as it is understood in Aristotle—that is, reasoning that concludes in an action, not in a judgment about what is to be done—and practical knowledge of the situation in which action is called for. (Something close to what the practically wise person, the phronimos as Aristotle understands her, would understand.) The assumption is that any such reasoning always relies on some knowledge of what we could call “practical actuality,” the ability to rightly distinguish between the “surface” actuality, “vacuous and vanishing,” and “the genuine essence of the world” (EL §234A). We know from our discussion of the logic of essence that this is not a strictly either/or picture; such an essence is manifest in, and has to be seen in, such a surface or Schein. And Hegel is insisting that any exercise of action-oriented practical rationality is inseparable from such an attempt at practical knowledge, a knowledge that will have the speculative form we have been investigating (the primary concept at issue in the case of the political is the state). In this knowing, itself the unity of the theoretical and the practical idea, or the unity of the true and the good, the will is said to know the purpose of the world as its own, and, in a restatement yet again of our theme throughout, “the intelligence knows the world as the actual concept” (ibid.). This knowledge is not of what pure practical reason requires, but of what in the state of the world requires the exercise of practical knowing, and this in a special sense beyond a mere claim for overcoming the irrationality and contingency of the existing world.

We should note too that this is not the only place where a tension like this (“has brought about” vs. “is eternally bringing about”) appears in Hegel’s thought. It is a crucial, though almost completely unnoticed, dimension of what he says about a similar topic in the preface to The Elements of the Philosophy of Right. The reconciliation claim, the famous or infamous “double sentence” (Doppelsatz), that

What is rational is actual; and what is actual is rational (PR 20)

comes with all sorts of provisos and qualifications.12 He first notes what he regards as the common way of thinking about actuality and norms. (This is still from the preface.)

In laws of right, however, the thing [Sache] is not valid because it exists; on the contrary, everyone demands that it should match his own criterion. Thus a conflict may arise between what is and what ought to be, between the right which has being in and for itself, which remains unaltered, and the arbitrary determination of what is supposed to be accepted as right. A disjunction and conflict of this kind is found only in the sphere [Boden] of the spirit, and since the prerogative of the spirit thus seems to lead to discord and unhappiness, we often turn away from the arbitrariness of life to the contemplation of nature and are inclined to take the latter as a model. (PR 13)

But this picture, for Hegel a wholly subjective account of rationality, deteriorates into an endless debate among conflicting opinions, the “stumbling around on the standpoint of morality” and “contradiction” quoted earlier. And he proposes in contrast,

Theories are put forward in opposition to what already exists [dem Daseienden], theories which seek to appear correct and necessary in and for themselves. From now on, there is a more special need to recognize and comprehend the thoughts of right. Since thought has set itself up as the essential form, we must attempt to grasp right, too, in terms of thought. If thought is to take precedence over right, this would seem to throw open the door to contingent opinions; but genuine thought is not an opinion about something [die Sache], but the concept of the thing [Sache] itself. The concept of the thing does not come to us by nature. Everyone has fingers and can take a brush and paint, but that does not make him a painter. It is precisely the same with thinking. The thought of right is not, for example, what everybody knows at first hand; on the contrary, correct thinking is knowing [das Kennen] and recognizing the thing, and our cognition should therefore be scientific.13

This might look as if it leads us back to a conception of right as an abstract ideal that descends from pure practical reason and is used to measure the rightness of some institution, but we know that Hegel has already insisted that “philosophy is its own time in thought” (ihre Zeit in Gedanken erfaßt), that its task is to “recognize reason as the rose in the cross of the present,”14 so we know he means that contemporary institutions must be understood in something like their degree of realization of their concept. Otherwise and more familiarly put, criticism of the state must be an internal criticism, formulated not in the language of philosophical theory alone, but in the terms endogenous to the institution’s own self-understanding, aspiration, and purposiveness. The right exposition (Darstellung) of such a self-understanding is thus already a critique (Kritik), as we discussed in chapter 1. This is certainly what follows in the book we are to read, an account of the modern notion of abstract right in terms of property, individualist and responsibility-based morality, and the specific institutions of modern ethical life—the bourgeois, nuclear family, a modern market economy, and a representative state. None of these are compared with an abstract ideal. The attempt is to lay out their own internal logical or conceptual structure. We try to understand the concept in its actuality, and that actuality in terms of its realization of the concept. In sum, we know to do that, that this is the philosophical work needed, and what it is to do that, by virtue of knowing “the absolute idea” in the SL.15

Now, we return to our original puzzle—what does it mean to say that concept or the “final purpose of the world” not only has realized itself, “brought itself about” in some actuality, but is “eternally bringing itself about”? An important clue about what Hegel means is given in that passage referred to earlier here, the one much quoted but the significance of which is rarely noticed. He is explaining his claim that philosophy, philosophical science in his terms, always comes on the scene with its comprehension “too late” to do any instructing about how the world ought to be. (Why should this be so if a philosophy of right consists in comparing institutional actuality with an abstract concept or norm?) Rather, in what is probably, together with his remarks about history as a “slaughter bench,” in the running for the best-known quotation from Hegel,

When philosophy paints its grey in grey, a shape of life has grown old, and it cannot be rejuvenated, but only recognized, by the grey in grey of philosophy; the owl of Minerva begins its flight only with the onset of dusk. (PR 23)

What is so striking about this claim is that it concludes the preface to a book that announces itself as a philosophical or “scientific” account of that shape of life then “actual.” The only inference one can draw is that this form of life has gown old and is dying, is turning necrotic “before our very eyes,” as it were. There is certainly no suggestion that Hegel believes that attempting to live in rightful relations to others has itself ceased to be a human need or aspiration. He must mean that these institutions are on their last legs, and that does seem a possible gloss on “eternally brings itself about”: that rightful institutions must produce themselves again and again. Far from blithely ignoring the sheer contingencies that human agents and societies are subject to, Hegel implies that, given these contingencies, it is likely that the state, understood as the realization of freedom, does not have anything like a permanently achieved, eternal structure, and that such historical contingencies will always pose anew the question of the rationality of the actual for any philosophy that understands itself as “its own time comprehended in thought” (where comprehended in thought means according to its concept, as that concept and the actuality it “gives itself” are understood in the SL).16 That question will be something like to what degree is any historical actuality “eternally bringing about the realization of the concept.” This is very much the way Hegel talks in the EL, in the last paragraph on practical knowledge and cognition in general.

The truth of the good is, by this means, posited as the unity of the theoretical and practical idea, [the notion] that the good has been attained in and for itself—that the objective world is thus in and for itself the idea precisely as it [the idea] at the same time eternally posits itself as purpose and through activity produces its actuality. This life, having come back to itself from the differentiation [Differenz] and finitude of knowing, and having become identical with the concept through the activity of the concept, is the speculative or absolute idea. (EL §235)

The curious phrase at issue for us is, again, “eternally posits itself as purpose and through activity produces its actuality” (wie sie zugleich ewig als Zweck sich setzt und durch Tätigkeit ihre Wirklichkeit hervorbringt).

This all means that it is not a refutation of Hegel’s political philosophy to point out that very little of the modern social and political world, the world of mass consumer societies, huge nation-states, deskilled industrial labor, alternate forms of marriage, globalized capitalism, the enormous power of the culture industry, and so forth looks anything like the ethical life described in the PR. The Hegelian argument would be that such institutions still understand themselves as rightful, rechtlich, and the measure of that rightfulness is still the realization of freedom, understood as Hegel does.17 (That is, any philosophical account would still have to show this, if possible, and to the degree it is possible.)18 And, on the one hand, with respect to institutions like modern marriage and the modern family, clearly a great deal of Hegel’s account of their rightfulness would have to be rethought, and various dimensions of what Hegel argued were essential elements of such social rightfulness—such as one’s job having a status worthy of respect as contribution to the common weal, that it has a “standing” (displayed in one’s role in an “estate” or Stand)—would still have to be understood as a requirement of right, but viewed in the light of such a requirement, much of modern labor in the contemporary world would be “false,” untrue to the essence of right.19

This all means that Hegel’s position on the historicity of reason is quite complicated, and can sometimes seem like a moving target,20 at times making conceptual, a priori claims about what it is to be spirit (i.e., free, in the sense of self-realizing), and at times linking any understanding of spirit to an account of concrete historical actuality. The issue is rather like how one should understand the relation between the introduction of the PR, which appears ahistorical and purely conceptual, and the body of the text, which plunges straightaway into modern, Western institutions. Partly this is a problem because the PR is an excerpted element of the Encyclopedia’s Philosophy of Spirit, its Philosophy of Objective Spirit. In the Encyclopedia, this means that the section has been prepared for by a logical account of conceptuality as such, and an argument for a transition to and then from a Philosophy of Nature (which itself is everywhere informed by the historical state of the current sciences) and the entire Philosophy of Spirit. Presumably this issue of the relation between a conceptual norm and its historical realization could be settled by attending to that transition argument. For our purposes, it is important to note that one possibility Hegel is definitely excluding is any sort of Platonic or Kantian notion of a purely rationally formulated ideal, which is then used as a permanently available standard with which to judge any historical actuality. We are clearly meant to regard the introduction’s explication of a free will, especially its core sections setting out the logical structure of the will, §§5, 6, and 7, as incomplete without a further explication of its historical actualization, or whatever of its historical actualization can be made out in the modern world. Section 4 is supposed to set out this relationship.

The basis of right is the realm of spirit [das Geistige] in general; its precise place and point of departure is the will. The will is free, so that freedom constitutes both its substance and its destiny, while the system of right is the realm of actualized freedom, the world of spirit [Geist] produced from within itself as a second nature.

This is completely consistent with what Hegel says about any particular state of such a historical world.

The good thus remains an ought; it exists in and for itself, but being, as the ultimate abstract immediacy, remains over against it also determined as a non-being. The idea of the fulfilled good is indeed an absolute postulate, but no more than a postulate, that is, the absolute encumbered with the determinateness of subjectivity. There still are two worlds in opposition, one a realm of subjectivity in the pure spaces of transparent thought, the other a realm of objectivity in the element of an externally manifold actuality, an impervious realm of darkness [Reich der Finsterniß]. (12.233)21

That last phrase hardly sounds like an uncritical affirmation of whatever has come about.

There are, finally, further indications of how this relationship between logic and history should be understood in the way Hegel characterizes his concluding moment, the absolute idea.

The Absolute Idea
Here is the way the EL formulates the last topic of the Logic.

The absolute idea is first the unity of the theoretical and the practical idea and, by this means, at the same time the unity of the idea of life and the idea of knowing. In knowing [Erkennen], we had the idea in the form of difference [Differenz] and the process of knowing has presented itself to us as the overturning of this difference and as the restoration of that unity which, as such and in its immediacy, is first the idea of life. The deficiency of [the concept of] life consists in being at first only the idea insofar as it is in itself [die an sich seiende Idee]; in contrast to this, but in just as one-sided a fashion, knowing is only the idea insofar as it is for itself. The unity and truth of these two is the idea insofar as it is in and for itself and, thereby, absolute. Up to now we have had for our object [Gegenstand] the idea in the development through its diverse stages; now, however, the idea is objective with respect to itself [sich selbst gegenständlich]. This is the noēsis noēseōs; what Aristotle already designated as the highest form of the idea. (EL §236A)

Even for Hegel, this is quite a mouthful. The absolute idea, or “the logical idea,” is also called, revealingly for our interests, “the idea of thinking itself.” That is, thinking’s self-determination of its necessary moments has reached full self-consciousness: noēsis noēseōs. (That the only determination of pure thinking can be by pure thinking, or a self-determination, helps to explain why “life” is the immediate form of the idea. A life-form’s life cycle is determined by the kind of being it is, a kind of immediate self-determination. It lives “for itself,” for what it needs, avoiding what is harmful, etc. The end of its living is its life-form, its concept.)22 Pure thinking, in determining what could be the object of a true self-conscious judgment, has turned to itself as the object of speculative judgment, since it has discovered, in detail, that the “truth” of objects is the relevant pure “concept,” that conceptual determination without which no empirical determination would be possible, that is: qualitative and quantitative predication, a determination based on an essence-appearance distinction, the right understanding of substance, causality, and now the right understanding of the “thoughts” that have made up the account thus far. Pure thinking is now in a position to “recollect” what it “was” to have been thinking purely. (We don’t thereby know any qualities or essences or attributes of modes of substance. We know the logic of substance-attribute, essence-appearance, and so forth. This will create a feeling of deflation at the end of the work that Hegel will address and that we will discuss below.) Of course, in one sense, knowing what we are about in pure thinking is what we should have understood at the beginning, not at the end. But an end that is a beginning, but that is fully comprehended as a beginning only at the end, and is essentially a recollection of its prior moments,23 is very much how Hegel talks in this section.

The final [point] is the insight that the entire unfolding makes up the content and interest.—This is, furthermore, the philosophical view that everything that appears limited [Beschränktes], taken for itself, acquires its worth [Wert] through inhering in the whole and being a moment of the idea. Thus it is that we have had the content and what we still have is the knowledge [Wissen] that the content is the living development of the idea and this simple retrospective [Rückblick] is contained in the form. Each of the stages considered up to this point is an image of the absolute, albeit in a limited manner at first, and so it drives itself on to the whole, the unfolding of which is precisely what we have designated the method. (EL §238A)

We have some sense now of the various aspects of the unity of the idea now on view: the unity of the subjective and the objective idea (logic as metaphysics), the unity of the theoretical and the practical idea (willing is a form of thinking; thinking is what Hegel calls in this section a “synthesis of striving” or inseparable from willing),24 the unity of the idea of life and the idea of knowing (the immediate unity of a life-form with itself, and the self-differentiation, the lack, that requires theoretical and practical knowing), and the unity of the analytic and the synthetic method (which I have treated as logically equivalent to the discussions of reflective and determinative judgment in chapter 6 and chapter 8). But this last characterization of method as the culmination of the entire book, as the absolute idea, is crucial.

In the SL, when he is trying to differentiate the Logic up until the introduction of the absolute idea, he distinguishes in effect between pure thinking determining itself in regard to anything it might judge about, and this new thought, what it is to have pure thinking itself as such an object. In the EL, in a rather informal anticipation of what he senses might be his reader’s frustration with the abstractness and nonsubstantive character of such an absolute, he notes, “When one speaks of the absolute idea, one can think that here finally the substantive must come to the fore, that here everything must become clear [hier müsse sich alles ergeben]” (EL §237A). He is anticipating those Hegel interpreters who want Hegel to defend a substantive absolute, God, a necessary being, a substance that is also subject, and so forth, and he is taking steps here to close off explicitly such an interpretation. In the SL, he characterizes the absolute idea in a way that returns us to his “realm of shadows” characterization. The absolute idea, he notes,

has shown itself to amount to this, namely that determinateness does not have the shape of a content, but that it is simply as form, and that accordingly the idea is the absolutely universal idea. What is left to be considered here, therefore, is thus not a content as such, but the universal character of its form—that is, method. (12.237)

Appropriately, the truth is the truth being demonstrated throughout the book, recollected here as such, the identity of the forms of thought and the forms of being, now thought as such, and not any determination of content (any determination of which quality, what essence, what cause, etc.).25

This result could easily be misinterpreted. The absolute idea—expressed in our terms, the identity of logic and metaphysics—could be understood as some sort of direct inference from the logical structure of thought. The basic form of rendering intelligible, one might reason, is the one-place categorical judgment, S is P. This simply requires, if to be is to be intelligible, that the world be structured as substances and properties. QED. But that would be dogmatism, and would be rejected by Hegel. The characteristic and necessary features of judgment must be derived with a claim to necessity from the simplest, most immediate manifestation of contentful thought, “Being!” It is always possible to suspect that in any such derivation, we are specifying only “what we must think” or even “must believe,” in order to judge rightly that something is the case. But such a suspicion is arbitrary if there is no reason to suspect such parochialism, as if thinking were obviously a species characteristic. The radicality of Hegel’s presuppositionless beginning is supposed to eliminate such a suspicion from the outset, and the self-negating and self-correcting derivation is supposed to preserve such purity. He realizes that the avoidance of any such parochialism, the establishment of pure thinking just as such as the “truth” of being, will disappoint anyone used to a more substantive version of metaphysics. Hence his somewhat ironic “sorry to disappoint you” anticipation cited earlier. That truth, though, the absolute idea, just is self-conscious conceptuality, or the right understanding of the implications of the logical structure of apperception, or purely logical knowledge, and in this purity the manifestation of absolute freedom. Once this has been established, the bearing of this system on determinate “what is . . . ?” questions that are nonempirical can be shown.

We are very far here from a Hegel committed to deriving the content of the world from pure thought alone, or who believes he has determined once and for all “the purpose of the world.” But, however “shadowy,” Hegel’s Logic is hardy a thin formalism. It—the idea of thought’s pure self-determination, the right understanding of thinking generally—stands against many other “absolute ideas” (whether characterized that way or not) that are prominent in modern philosophy: empiricism, dogmatic rationalism, reductionism, scientism, consequentialism, moralism. And the implications of the account of pure thinking, of philosophy itself, once those implications are drawn out in the rest of the Encyclopedia, are of great importance in philosophy for how we should understand the conceptual structure of any investigation of nature, and how human freedom should be understood, what counts as its realization. He only gestures at this extension in the closing moments of the EL and the SL, but what he says is significant.

“Transition”
The least ambitious way to characterize how Hegel wants us to understand the relationship between the Logic and the Philosophies of Nature and of Spirit is that the conceptual structure of either interrogation cannot be coherently understood as wholly empirically determined. Each depends in some way on a nonderived conceptual structure manifested in its pure form in the SL. This is not incorrect, but it does not yet distinguish how Hegel thinks of that relationship in a way that will exclude the commonsense notion of an empty, subjective pure form being filled in by objective experience. This notion cannot be right because on Hegel’s approach any such conceptual structure already determines the concrete possibility of determinately intelligible empirical content.26 (It does not determine the content itself,27 but the inseparable form of such content, a logical form now understood as inflected by attention to what is other than pure thought and to action in the world.) Said more precisely to avoid any hint of “impositionism” (what critics usually mean when they understand an interpretation like this one to be a species of “transcendental” philosophy), the formal determinateness of any such content is identical with conceptual determinacy. But that concerns pure concepts. As we have already seen, there is plenty of room for the exploration of an unknown empirical and finite world, that “realm of darkness.”28

But it is precisely the right understanding of the absolute idea as method that can be said to open the door to the “philosophy of reality,” the Realphilosophie, that depends on such an understanding of conceptuality. The point made above, that this philosophical appeal to a structure of knowing as bearing on the extralogical is not a form of impositionism or “transcendentalism,” is made by Hegel in the penultimate paragraph of the EL.

The method is not an external form but the soul and concept of the content, from which it is distinguished only insofar as the moments of the concept, even in themselves, in their [respective] determinacy, come to appear as the totality of the concept. (EL §243)

But his actual specification of the transition to the Philosophy of Nature is difficult to understand. He writes:

Yet the absolute freedom of the idea is that it does not merely pass over into life or let life shine in itself as finite knowing, but instead, in the absolute truth of itself, resolves to release freely from itself the moment of its particularity or the first determining and otherness, the immediate idea, as its reflection itself as nature [sondern in der absoluten Wahrheit ihrer selbst sich entschließt, das Moment ihrer Besonderheit oder des ersten Bestimmens und Andersseins, die unmittelbare Idee als ihren Widerschein, sich als Natur frei aus sich zu entlassen]. (EL §244)

The idea itself as nature, and nature as the reflection or Widerschein of the idea, is obviously what poses the difficulty for any commentator. This makes the point that in any investigation of nature or spirit there must be an a priori element reflecting the basic structure or moments of the logic of being and the logic of essence, but inflected in a way the reflects the domains of nature and spirit. Of course, we cannot understand this very well without studying what this looks like in the two other parts of the Encyclopedia, but the phrase “resolves to release freely from itself” suggests a practical dimension underlying the Logic’s movement that we discussed in chapter 7 and that surfaces here as a result of the Logic’s own self-consciousness about its proper subject matter, an incompleteness captured so mysteriously in our title, the realm of shadows. In the SL, this is more explicit and even dramatic.

this idea is still logical; it is shut up in pure thought [in den reinen Gedanken eingeschlossen], the science only of the divine concept. Its systematic exposition is of course itself a realization, but one confined within the same sphere. Because the pure idea of cognition is to this extent shut up within subjectivity, it is the impulse [Trieb] to sublate it, and pure truth becomes as final result also the beginning of another sphere and science. (12.253)

In qualifying this expansion, we might call it, of the bearing of the logical on the extralogical (Hegel cautions us that it should not be understood as a “transition” in the sense we have become used to within the Logic),29 he again says that the idea “freely discharges” or releases (entläßt) itself (12.253). He means that the logician can understand this bearing without any qualification on the self-sufficiency and philosophical priority of the absolute idea, even with respect to the “externality of space and time absolutely existing for itself without subjectivity” (12.253). This self-sufficiency and priority are not qualified by such a “release.” Nothing will qualify the logical fact that everything intelligible “remains in and for itself the totality of the concept” (ibid.). And he ends the book without much detail about the nature of this dissatisfaction with the self-enclosed concept, but with a firm, and I hope by now relatively clear, restatement of the nature of a speculative logic, and a reference to the final completion of the Encyclopedia in the Philosophy of Spirit.

But what is posited by this first resolve of the pure idea to determine itself as external idea is only the mediation out of which the concept, as free concrete existence that from externality has come to itself, raises itself up, completes this self-liberation in the science of spirit, and in the science of logic finds the highest concept of itself, the pure concept conceptually comprehending itself [dem sich begreiffenden reinen Begriffe]. (12.253)30

 
    