8
# LIFE AS A LOGICAL CONCEPT
The Problem of Life
In the relevant section of the logic of the Concept, Hegel appears to go far beyond Kant in his Critique of the Power of Judgment, when he claims that we know just from general reflection on rendering anything intelligible that in such a rendering there is, must be, a distinction between living and nonliving beings. While the claim that there are detectable empirical differences between what seem to be living and nonliving beings is an ordinary claim, of no particular philosophical significance, the claim that there is an irreducible difference between living and nonliving beings, that the distinction is necessary, or that the norms of explicability for nonliving beings cannot be invoked to account for living beings, is a philosophical claim, for which there is no empirical court of appeal.1 Life is a pure concept; that is, this categorical distinction is not empirically discoverable. If we are restricted to empirical experience alone, we find no categorical difference between an iron blade rusting in the moist air and a plant dying for lack of water. Explaining the two events empirically would have the same logical form (and, as we have seen, for Hegel this is equivalent to saying that the events have the same form). Hegel insists otherwise. In the latter case, the plant is said “not to agree with its concept,” not to be functioning as a plant should, and that claim involves a different logical form. (There are of course many contemporary philosophers who see no problem in not being able to make this distinction, because they think that there is no distinction, that reference to “how the plant should function” is not a useful or even a genuine scientific concept.)

As a consequence of this exploration of logical form alone, we are supposed to know that there must be forms of thought specific to self-organized beings, to perceiving and desiring self-organized beings, and to self-conscious and rational perceiving and desiring self-organized beings, or to plants, animals, and human animals. We know what it is to be a living being in a way that cannot depend on discovering this empirically. So how do we know it?

We should first note the difficulty of stating this project correctly. First, just as Kant did not attempt to deduce the necessary existence of events in causal relations, but sought to show that any event that did exist must stand in a necessary relation to some prior event, and just as Kant did not try to deduce the necessary existence of living beings, but tried to show that any world that required mechanistic explanations of what exists, or any world in which change is a matter of efficient causation, must also allow, cannot rule out, that there are changes like gestation, birth, growth, reproduction, disease, and death, which cannot be properly accounted for by the logical form appropriate for nonliving beings, so Hegel is not out to deduce a priori the necessary existence of living beings, but has an ambition similar to Kant’s (that is, such changes cannot be properly accounted for by the logical form appropriate for nonliving beings) but much greater because Hegel denies that teleological explanations are merely subjectively necessary. The Hegelian version of that argument form is something like: in order for thinking to be a possibly veridical thinking of anything, which for Hegel is the same condition as, in order for being to be determinately anything at all, discriminable as what it is, it must be qualitatively predicable and quantitatively predicable, the relation between quantitative alteration and qualitative change must be determinable, and therewith a distinction between appearance and essence must be makeable . . . and so on through the objective logic. That is obviously quite a task, and goes part of the way in explaining the denseness of the enterprise.

This is what generates a task that is more ambitious than delimiting the features of that special logical form required for the intelligibility of living beings or actions or human practices. This is the complicated task Michael Thompson set for himself in his book Life and Action.2 That project has yielded important results, especially in showing that the species universality of living beings cannot be understood in the post-Fregean understanding of universal quantification. “Wolves hunt in packs” cannot mean that for all X, if X is a wolf, X hunts in packs. Wolves do hunt in packs, but if, for various ecological reasons, many wolves, perhaps even all remaining wolves, cannot any longer hunt in packs, they are clearly still wolves, and it still remains universally true that “wolves hunt in packs.”3 But Hegel wants also to show much more. For one thing, this clarification of form does not address the question Kant raised in the third Critique: granted there are these logical differences that we appeal to in distinguishing living beings and their species universality, what is the status of the categorical differences? Does the form designate a realm of being explicable only by appeal to such a form? Hegel answers yes to the last question; he claims that such distinctive conceptual forms have a necessity that descends from a general inquiry into the intelligibility of objects at all. The argument is that objects and events would not be available to us in their full intelligibility if the distinction between living and nonliving could not be made. This means that accounts given of nonliving beings would be insufficient on their own terms without a distinction between living and nonliving. In the terms of the logic of the Concept where the concept of life appears, he means to show that there could not be adequate mechanistic and chemical and “external” teleological explanations (say, the production of an artifact guided by a maker’s representation) without the contrasting distinction with living beings, without, following Kant’s terms, “internal” teleology. (That is, a case where an element is for the sake of the whole without its being the—impossible—case that the element or part intends to be for the whole, and without reference to any designer’s intention).4 His unusual thesis is that teleology is “the truth of mechanism.” That is, mechanistic explanations are domain specific, and so represent an abstraction from a more comprehensive and complex domain that includes subjective or intentional teleology and objective teleology in organic beings.5

Hegel is fully aware of the skepticism that his proposal will encounter:

The idea of life has to do with a subject matter so concrete, and if you will so real, that in dealing with it one may seem according to the common notion of logic to have overstepped its boundaries. (12.179)6

The “Logic” of Life
As we have seen, for Kant, the actual rather than suggested bearing of the form of any possible thought on the form of any possible object required appeal to some way of determining a priori the form of our receptive capacities, an a priori way of appealing to what is other than thought. This is so because Kant thought that thinking alone had no receptive access to reality, and that our only access was through sensible affection. Since this access is possible a priori, since there are pure forms of sensible intuition, there can be a transcendental deduction establishing the objective validity of the categories, that is, their being the forms of objects, at least objects of sensible experience. For Hegel, by contrast, the final step would be rightly formulated as: the conceptual forms required for the unity of judgment are, at the same time, the forms necessary for any object determinacy. The forms of thought are the forms of being.

As we have also seen, Hegel famously thought that when Kant attempted to show the bearing of these conceptual powers on the form of objects, his appeal to such subjective forms of intuition inevitably “psychologized” the results, limited them to our species, and generated an unacceptable (even “absurd”) thesis about the unknowability of things in themselves. Such an appeal was not necessary. There were no pure, subjective forms of sensible intuition. Hegel relocated any question about space and time to the Philosophy of Nature, or to a philosophical reflection on the scientific treatment of space and time. Positively, this rejection amounted to the claim that, properly understood, pure thinking’s investigation of itself could, all on its own, establish the form of objects. Everything, of course, depends on “properly understood.” Here again are the passages that have served us as touchstones throughout this essay:

Thus logic coincides with metaphysics, with the science of things grasped in thoughts, which used to be taken to express the essentialities of the things. (EL §24)

And

The objective logic thus takes the place rather of the former metaphysics which was supposed to be the scientific edifice of the world as constructed by thoughts alone. (SL 21.48)

Essentially, what happens in the logic of the Concept is that the notion of the concept, now the “object” of our inquiry, in the claim that “the truth of the object is its concept” will acquire a more complex logical structure, ultimately a systematic structure, as in the systems of mechanism and chemism. And ultimately our penultimate topic, “The Idea of Cognition” (die Idee der Erkenntnis), will offer the final metalevel understanding of the Concept as the ground of all cognition, the Concept as cognition itself.

Objectivity in the Subjective Logic
Before we proceed to the specific notion of life and a further comparison of Kant and Hegel, we need to locate that discussion within the development of mechanism and chemism “toward” subjective teleology, which will provide the ground of the transition to life, and then as its own topic within the development of the Absolute Idea. Life is said to be the “immediate” manifestation of the Idea. Life will reveal at an initial level the true unity of subjectivity and objectivity. This is said in the sense in which even plants, for Hegel, have “subjectivity” even as objects. Their growth and nutrition cannot be comprehended adequately as just the product of mechanical forces. Each can be said to “direct” the course of its life as it requires; each has an inner distinct from an outer, where this does not just mean inside as opposed to outside its surface.7 This in turn is linked to Hegel’s treatment of the Absolute Idea itself, which we have provisionally suggested should be understood as the pure concept of conceptuality, or the final self-determination by pure thinking of intelligibility itself, now as the unity of Subjectivity and Objectivity, a claim he glosses in terms that have become familiar here: the Concept finally giving itself its own content.8

I suggested in the previous chapter that having shown the truth of the object in self-consciousness, in conceptuality, Hegel proposes to investigate the concept in that status, now understood as being-true, or in its being the ground of the intelligibility of the object. As he says, now “the concept determines itself as objectivity” (21.127).9 This begins after a consideration of the concept in its pure formality, in the structure of concept, judgment, and syllogism. This then suggests the question of the world of objects, of “the truth,” of being-in-and-for-itself, already reflected in the truth-preserving inferential structure of such a syllogistic. To have reached this stage, presupposing everything that has gone before, is to see the logic of the relation among concepts in judgments and of judgments in inferential syllogistic relations as comprehending objects and their interrelations as explicable in a system. (This point was made by Kant in the first Critique in the transcendental dialectic. Real explicability would be a system of causal laws, supporting robust counterfactuals and necessary inferences. Of course, all of this was a regulative ideal, and Hegel’s treatment is very different, but the theme of full comprehension as full systematicity is one they share.) At such a point, we will have fleshed out considerably the “object’s being its concept” in a much fuller logical system of judgmental interrelations, systematically, and a modally robust one, prescribing what must and cannot happen under this or that condition. In this fuller systematic picture, we need a determinate characterization of the norm, comprehensibility, as such. Such a norm or pure concept of genuine understanding will tell us what a thing is in terms of its relevant relational properties. As in what is presupposed and what follows about such relationality in designations like: Copper’s melting point is 1083 degrees Celsius.

That determinate norm of comprehensibility is what is introduced by the pure concept Mechanism—more broadly in the claim that true comprehensibility is and is only mechanistic, paradigmatically Newtonian mechanics.10 Yet again, it is this sort of overreach that reveals the limitations and incompleteness of such a norm of comprehensibility. This is the first, immediate, simplest manifestation of the a priori claim to a norm for determinate explicability. Hegel spells out its conditions.

The differentiated moments [the units of comprehension] are complete and self-subsistent objects that, consequently, even in connection relate to one another as each standing on its own, each maintaining itself in every combination as external.—This is what constitutes the character of mechanism, namely, that whatever the connection that obtains between the things combined, the connection remains one that is alien to them, that does not affect their nature. (12.133)

This is essentially a “billiard balls” model of moving and inertial forces, in which there is what Hegel continually calls “an indifference” in the relation among objects. And therein will lie its chief problem.

That is, the indifference of objects external to each other, or comprehended only as matter moving and colliding in space, means that there is no real explanation for what happens, just a formalization of what happens.11 There is no way (except pragmatically or “subjectively” for Hegel) to select in or out the relevant relations among such indifferent objects, and we will find instead that we are awash in infinite contingency, with no real ground for our isolation of the relevant units of comprehension. (At least no ground until we are able to introduce reference to what in an object’s nature makes its relation with other objects impossible, possible, or necessary. This will be chemism.)12 We will see more of this in the account of life itself, but here is Hegel’s summary:

Dead mechanism was the mechanical process of objects above considered that immediately appeared as self-subsisting, but precisely for that reason are in truth nonself-subsistent and have their center outside them; this process that passes over into rest exhibits either contingency and indeterminate difference or formal uniformity. This uniformity is indeed a rule, but not law. (12.146)

Chemism does make such an appeal to the internal properties, the chemical properties, to explain why some chemical compounds are possible and others are not. Objects considered chemically are not “indifferent” but determine their relationality as dependent on the kind they are.

The chemical object is distinguished from the mechanical in that the latter is a totality indifferent to determinateness, whereas in the chemical object the determinateness, and hence the reference to other, and the mode and manner of this reference, belong to its nature. (12.148)

At this point, in a set of remarks I still find obscure, Hegel argues that this mini-ascent to greater degrees of internal determination of external relationality gives rise logically to the idea of purpose. Sodium does not have as its purpose “to form an ionic compound with chloride,” but the chemical nature of sodium and of chloride will allow us to understand their combinability, and that result seems to inspire the thought of an even more determinate transcendence of mere indifference. Not only would this involve attention, say, to the biochemical reactions in the kidney’s functioning, but these reactions would then be tied in their comprehensibility to the kidney’s purpose. Such a further transcendence of indifference provided by the general notion of purpose would then count as an initial or immediate form of true “self-determination,” not an indifferent or merely external “determination by an other.”

Overall, it is possible to get a general sense of what he means by this hierarchy of adequacy. When we say that average acceleration over a period of time is its change in velocity divided by the duration of the period, or when we say that the hydrogen and oxygen molecules combined to form water, or when we say that that clock functions poorly, or that wolf is deformed, these are not empirical distinctions within a common notion of comprehensibility. In Hegel’s language, they are objective aspects of the logical distinctions between immediacy, mediation, and self-mediation necessary for all objective intelligibility, and this order manifests ever greater possible comprehensibility in these terms. This moves us closer to life as a concept, the first manifestation of unity of concept and reality as purpose (and so the immediate manifestation of the idea). A living being’s concept is not external to it as a particular being. That particularity is essentially nothing other than the becoming of its concept. The concept is internal to its nature, and that nature is self-determining, not determined from without. (Hence the claim that life is the first, immediate manifestation of the Absolute Idea, the unity of subjectivity and objectivity.)13

This is clearly where we are headed, but Hegel’s discussion here introduces that idea of purposiveness in a more indirect way that seems to diverge from the account of the logic of comprehensibility. He discusses first just the logical relations inherent in subjective purposiveness, an intelligence setting an end and pursuing that end by the appropriate means. This would already introduce the idea of a unity of self-determination or subjectivity with objectivity—with the physical, chemical means, which, as efficient causes, are taken up as such means within a subjectively determined purpose. But it (artifactual making and so subjective end setting) seems oddly illustrative, used to make a point in preparation for the account of living beings; such artifactual teleology seems not to be developed internally from some determinate, internal deficiency of chemism.

He begins to explain what he seems to have in mind in general by noting that mechanism and chemism are themselves pure concepts, products of pure thinking. Each is an all-inclusive theory of true comprehensibility, and as “pure thinking” each obviously requires a that-which-thinks, or a subject, one that sets the end of explicability and judges the theory’s sufficiency in accordance with that end. (This is meant not as a species characteristic but as a requirement on “any thinker.”) Since, as we saw in the previous chapter, thinking for both Kant and Hegel is itself purposive, mechanism can be said in this sense to presuppose subjective teleology, a living being that can set ends, for example, the end of understanding. Such a capacity, to set and pursue ends, already presupposes a living being who can set such ends. However, such a reference to the purposiveness of the thinker is available at any point in the Logic’s development and does not seem internally related to chemism. What will eventually make Hegel’s account so ambitious is that he treats this requirement—that objects and events would not be available to us in their full intelligibility, if the distinction between living and nonliving could not be made—not as telling us something merely about us, about our requirements, but as a claim about the real distinction between living and nonliving beings. And so in this case too, we return to the familiar claim: the forms of thought are the forms of being.

Thus the idea is, first of all, life. It is the concept which, distinct from its objectivity, simple in itself, permeates that objectivity and, as self-directed purpose, has its means within it and posits it as its means, yet is immanent in this means and is therein the realized purpose identical with itself. (12.177)

Now, a simple way to sum all of this up, however misleading, would be to say that for Hegel life is an objectively necessary pure concept because we know that mechanism is such a concept, and that chemism is, and that artifactual teleology is, and that these pure concepts are incomplete without teleological concepts, ultimately the concept of living organisms. And of course mechanism et al. are objectively necessary because they are necessary implications of the failure of mere “Being” to be a thought, and of the consequent determinations of the discursive possibilities necessary for thought to be possibly truth-bearing, to be of an object. This of course is hardly an adequate summary of a comprehensible argument. For one thing, the argument stretches hundreds and hundreds of pages, every moment of which must be held to this kind of overarching criterion. This would require a commentary at least ten times as large as the Logic. But there are, I hope, moments of illumination in what Hegel is trying to say that can stand relatively on their own.

Kant and the Problem of Life
These general characteristics of Hegel’s project, and the specific movement through the objectivity section, bear directly on Hegel’s treatment of the concept of life and, yet again, on what has always seemed to me the clearest way, by both contrast and comparison, to clarify his position—its relation to Kant, in this case Kant’s position in the Critique of the Power of Judgment. The kinship is clear. In Kant’s theory of experience, there is nothing in experience that would distinguish living beings from nonliving. And the concept is not an idea of reason, not derivative from the regulative ideal of a substantial soul, an unconditioned for a series, or a necessary being (at least it is not arrived at in the same way). Rather it is relevant for the faculty he is exploring in this Critique—judging. That is, it is necessary for the actualization of a conceptual power—judging—in one domain not tied to, dependent on, sensible experience.

But the contrast with Hegel is also obvious. Kant argues that we must conceive living beings as a distinct ontological kind, requiring an internal teleological explanation that is irreducible to mechanistic explanation. This appears to mean many things to Kant: that the known properties of matter, even in his dynamical conception, cannot account for the organization and unity of some beings, living beings; that while efficient causal explanations are possible for such beings, those causal laws could not explain their living nature, that their parts are the parts they are only within some whole and that the parts are interrelated and require a relation to other parts; that while efficient causation can explain how the whole depends on the parts, it cannot explain how the parts depend on the whole. But he also insists that we cannot know that the beings we pick out as falling under this category really are the living, internally self-organizing beings that we, with “subjective” necessity, take them to be. As we have already seen, Kant distinguishes, and Hegel praises him for doing so, between an element in a complex that is purposive because it satisfies the ends of the designer or maker, like a radiator in a car, or external purposiveness, and an element the purposiveness of which is determined not by any appeal to an external designer, but rather “internally” in an organic self-organizing and self-maintaining whole. We explain the parts by reference to this whole, which itself is, reciprocally, the reason the parts are as they are; and all of this without any intention of the parts, such as organs, to represent anything as their end. So, for example, we can say what leukocytes, white blood cells, are for, without reference to a designer of the system, but by reference to the internal ends of the living being, such as maintaining health by attacking foreign invaders like bacteria or parasites. As Kant says, we can show that the parts of a living being “as far as their existence and their form are concerned are possible only through their relation to the whole.”14

But, again, this is all a matter of what we must think for the sake of a satisfying explanation. Our empirical experience, according to Kant, does not allow a truly objective categorical or generic distinction between our iron blade rusting and plant dying. They obey exactly the same laws of nature. All we know is that any change is connected with necessity to some other event, and, if we are ambitious Kantians, that particular changes are tokens of type-type causal laws about events. The unusual causal order required by internal teleology—that the effect of some cause is also the cause of that cause (that the effect of the activities of leukocytes, attacking and destroying foreign invaders, is the cause of there being such leukocytes)—is merely a subjective heuristic. It must be merely that because the formulation just given about teleological causality makes no sense in the scientific terms Kant considers himself to have established. “It is entirely contrary to the nature of physical-mechanical causes that the whole should be the cause of the possibility of the causality of the parts” (KU 20: 236).15 He tells us in §65 that this final causality, as causality, is scientifically (i.e., within the domain of knowledge proper) unintelligible, and could be made intelligible only if matter itself were alive (which he calls hylozoism),16 or if we conjoined to nature a designing soul, thus contradicting the assumption of a self-organizing nature, and committing us to something we have no right to assume. “Strictly speaking, therefore, the organization of nature has nothing analogous to any causality known to us.”17 So while Kant has many other compelling things to say about the incompatibility of mechanistic explanation and teleological explanation (such as reference to a “formative force” that mechanism cannot account for), and about the impossibility of life’s originating from the attractive and repulsive motions of matter, it is this assumption that explanation proper is causal, and that for living beings this would require an impossibility, something that is cause and effect of itself, that he seems to think is decisive.

But all of this is supposed to be consistent with the unavoidability of teleological explanations, that is, with their necessity. It is not simply up to us, arbitrarily, whether we explain things mechanically or in terms of natural purposiveness, whether we find it convenient or useful or not. The category is not a mere heuristic, and it is not conceptually conceivable that we are just “for this moment in history” as yet unable to appeal to the properties of matter or to the form of mechanistic explanation. He asserts as a philosophical truth that we will never be able to do so, and even that it is “absurd” to imagine that we could. (No “Newton for a blade of grass,” ever.) He says clearly that we can no more give up the teleological principle and the idea of final causality than we can give up the universal causal principle itself (although the reasons for such impossibility are different). One brief reason he gives for this is that this abandonment would leave us without anything “for guidance in observing.”18 Since we could certainly discover intricate chains of efficient causal relations, say, the biochemical cause-and-effect relations that occur at the microbiological level when leukocytes are at work, he must mean that thereby we would not understand what we are observing, would not even be able to say that the leukocytes are failing when they do fail, would not know what to look at, how to organize the units of explanation. If we take this at face value, on its own it is hardly a dispositive argument. We could simply admit this but argue that a sick body and a healthy body obey the same physical laws and that the distinction between sick and healthy is one imported just because of our interests. It has nothing to do with “observing” itself.19

But Kant may well have in mind a stronger claim or several related claims. While we have the possibility of a physical and chemical account of cell division, we are not observing a mere series. With that account alone, we would have no way of understanding that these processes are part of one series, no way to isolate anything like “what is to come next” and so no language to explain what happens when it does not, and we would be assimilating the processes occurring in one form, cell division in a plant, say, and in another form altogether, in an animal, say. This notion of an insufficiency in accounting for the observed will play an important role later.

Inspired by such considerations, Kant keeps doubling down on his claims about necessity. In the antithesis of the antinomy of teleological judgment, which Kant, in his solution to the antinomy, wants to affirm, he says unqualifiedly that “some products of material nature cannot be judged to be possible in terms of merely mechanical laws. Judging them requires a quite different causal law—viz., that of final causes.”20 Here the claim seems to run through a claim about the requirements of judgment (rather than mere understanding), and a presupposed claim about the necessity of judgment.

To add to the puzzle, although he also says such things as that the concept of final causality “does indeed have objective reality,” it is nevertheless “inadequate for dogmatic determinations” and “we have nothing that could assure us that the concept has objective reality.”21

The simple conjunction of a claim about what we must think (even to “observe” nature), and a claim about what we do not and cannot ever know—that nature is as we must think it to be—is the sort of thing that always deeply frustrated Hegel, and did so from his earliest Jena years (in Glauben und Wissen, for example). For one thing, the idea that we are required to believe something that doesn’t make any scientific sense, that science will never understand organic beings as such,22 is an insult to our rational nature, and the claim that we do not and never will really know that there are living beings, or that the very concept is not something we ever truly understand, is equally offensive.23 The promise of the earlier claims we have summarized is that if we have understood properly what it is to claim that we cannot help making a distinction between living and nonliving, then we have established a metaphysical conclusion, not something essentially about us, about the human cognitive capacities. A typical remark from the Logic, cited earlier as an epigram:

Critical philosophy did indeed already turn metaphysics into logic but, like the subsequent idealism, it gave to the logical determinations an essentially subjective significance out of fear of the object. (21.35)

(This last can sound like a strange rhetorical reference to Kant’s psychology, but it is a measure of Hegel’s frustration with Kant that Kant can say such things as “even empirical cognition of their cause and effect presupposes concepts of reason”24 and yet still insist on the “essentially subjective significance” of this necessity.)

Hegel’s Objections to “Subjective Necessity”
Even from this breathless summary, it should be clear enough that there is a general and quite similar project shared by both philosophers. An abstract formulation of that project would be a systematic determination of what reason requires of itself, “moments” without which reason would not be reason. (As we have seen, in the published introduction to the third Critique, Kant even coined a name for this norm, to accompany autonomy and heteronomy: heautonomy, although he does not thereafter take it up.) The disagreement concerns the status of the results: merely subjectively necessary, or of objective metaphysical significance?

For both, reason’s main activity consists in its forms of inference, an activity that can proceed from, but is not tied to, the results of empirical experience. In all contexts, thinking’s productive power is self-determining, and, as Hegel sometimes says, “free,” on its own. For both thinkers, our point of orientation is syllogistic, and we should ask what such syllogistic activity, given an exfoliation of its basic forms, suggests about where we are led when our intellectual power reaches substantive results on its own all extending Kant’s basic clue about the relation between the forms of thought and the forms of objects.

According to Kant, we are led astray. The form of the categorical syllogistic inference grounds a “paralogistic” inference to an immaterial substance, a soul, or Cartesian mind, as the ground of thought. The hypothetical syllogism requires of us an antinomial inference to the unconditioned ground of a sequence or series. And the form of the disjunctive syllogism itself leads to the postulation of an absolutely necessary being.

Hegel’s invocation of syllogistic, while it is the orienting beginning of the logic of the Concept, and so while it recalls Kant’s orientation in the Dialectic, proceeds differently in its details. But, as we have seen, Hegel is interested also in what the inferential forms of relations among judgments imply about the “objective” manifestations of such forms, and all of this amounts to the extraordinarily ambitious goal of showing that mechanism itself already presupposes teleology which presupposes living beings. To review: he begins with reason’s requirements on explanation as mechanism, the form according to which relations among objects are established, but “the diverse parts behave indifferently to each other, and their linkage is only external to them” (EL §194Z). (Moving matter in motion.) What he tries to show is that mechanism as a principle, as a pure or logical principle (rather than any first-order empirical discovery about the world), already amounts to, implicitly, what is most distinctive about teleology, an “explanation by concept,” how a thing “matches up” to its concept, although in mechanism this concept is only “in itself,” not “for itself.” That is, mechanism presupposes its appropriateness and the demarcation of the domain of its appropriateness, and this is a normative suitability that will become more explicit, more for-itself, as the limitations of mechanism and the restrictions of this domain are thought through. This form or concept, he shows, cannot cover relations that are not so wildly contingent, but ordered according to the natures of the elements, where objects are “essentially differentiated,” so that the objects “are what they are only in their relation to each other” (ibid.). That is, his claim is that while mechanism posits a radical independence among objects in motion, the results of mechanism itself reveal a regular dependence, fixed and unvarying, among such putative independent objects, and it must transform itself into a position that can do this justice, not treat it as an astonishing accident. He tries to connect this form and its transition to syllogistic form, but here, and throughout, that seems more a gloss on this underlying argument about independence and dependence (see EL §198).25 He calls this transformation of mechanism into something in which its concept of itself is more but not fully explicit, or for itself, “chemism” and is thinking of chemical compounds.

But there are also explicable relations that are both external and mechanical but uniquely suited by their natures for other elements, like the gears of a watch. He wants to say that the two forms, mechanism and chemism, on their own generate this joint possibility, elements both external to one another and yet not “indifferent” to each other, and that it is a possibility wherein the role of the concept of the thing is more explicit and more implicitly invoked in explanation than in the prior two modalities (“because it is a watch and should keep accurate time,” in explaining a gear). In his terms, not always the most helpful, the simple immediacy of the elements has been denied, and all the elements are now to be understood as “what they actually are” only in relation to each other and the whole, viz., the artifact’s concept. He then tries to show how such an external relation of concept to explanation (by reference to a maker) already contrasts with a being whose ends are internal to it by its nature, not by an external source, and this initially defines for him a living being. He ultimately wants to show the connection between such living beings and beings that can set and pursue ends, or animal life.

Now all of these transitions are supposed to be internal to the conceptual moment under interrogation, so Hegel has a different and stronger notion of the necessity of what reason requires of itself than Kant, and in section 3 above, we explored that idea. But we have enough in view to make our final comparison and contrast with Kant.

One way of summarizing what we have been looking at is this. It is not correct to say that Hegel is arguing that we do know a priori what Kant insisted we could only think with subjective necessity. This characterization would require that Hegel, contrary to Kant, thought that we could provide content for pure concepts, that we could establish somehow, without any deduction, what we need to establish: that there are in fact objects in conformity with what pure, in themselves empty, concepts require. But as we have seen, Hegel does not accept Kant’s claim that pure concepts are “empty,” and so Kant’s claim that a link, a second step, is necessary to “connect” such concepts with objects. That emptiness claim depends on a substantive thesis about pure forms of intuition, and is not internal to a science of pure thinking. Pure thinking’s determination of the necessary moments of possible conceptual determinacy are just thereby a specification of objects in their knowability. If there is a way to determine internally such elements of conceptual determinacy, no “second step” is necessary. Such a determination would be at the same time a determination of objects in their possible knowability. We are at the point where Hegel is trying to show that mechanism, as a pure concept, cannot be the last step in the internal self-determination by pure thinking of itself.

But one more dimension of Kant’s treatment is necessary for us to take the full measure of Hegel’s divergence from Kant. We need to return briefly to a Kantian topic discussed previously in chapter 6.

Recall that when Kant specified why there must be reliance on the concept of life, even for empirical cognition, or why there must be this “determination by concepts,” he put the matter in a way that reminds us of the subject matter of the book. He said, “some products of material nature cannot be judged to be possible in terms of merely mechanical laws. Judging them requires a quite different causal law—viz., that of final causes.”26 It is judging that uniquely requires what he claims is required. He is talking here not about judgment simply as logical synthesis, the claiming of what is the case, but about reflective judgment, the inferential faculty (or the distinctive function of reason in this context; there is only one intellectual faculty for Kant) that this Critique has discovered, and that gives us a way to pose Hegel’s problems with Kant’s very restricted notion of when an appeal to a concept can be said to ground a thing’s possibility.

Both parts of the Critique of the Power of Judgment are a critique of the reflective and determining functions of judgment. Kant’s official formulation is:

The power of judgment can be regarded either as a mere faculty for reflecting on a given representation, in accordance with a certain principle, for the sake of a concept that is thereby made possible, or as a faculty for determining an underlying concept through a given empirical representation. In the first case it is the reflecting, in the second case the determining power of judgment. To reflect (to consider), however, is to compare and to hold together given representations either with others or with one’s faculty of cognition, in relation to a concept thereby made possible.27

As with virtually everything else we have touched on, this is a claim worthy of much more attention, but for our purposes, we need only the following summary, which can set out a larger context for the issue already discussed in chapter 6.

In early 1789 Kant began to formulate the new problem of reflective judgment, as well as a new a priori principle for such a faculty, the purposiveness of nature. What is important to notice for our purposes is that with that development, the shape of the entire critical project began to change dramatically and a watershed historical moment occurred, one crucial to the development of later idealisms. The so-called “First Introduction” of May 1789 for the first time went far beyond a critique of taste. Kant had realized that something like the deep structure of judgments like “this rose is beautiful” actually contravened its own surface structure, that the predicate “beautiful” was not really functioning as a standard predicate, as it appeared to. It referred to no objective property or mere secondary quality. Instead, he concluded, it involved a nonconceptually guided reflective activity on the part of the subject of the experience, whose novel logic required notions like a free play of the faculties, purposiveness without a purpose, disinterested pleasure, a commonsense and universal subjective validity. The realization of the distinct features of this reflective activity was only the beginning of a series of more strikingly novel claims of interest to us. That issue, he clearly thought, that intellectual activity, the reflective judging that resulted in aesthetic judgments, also constituted the basic structure of teleological judgments, and so could account for the unique intelligibility of organic beings. In something like the same way that the normal perceptual experience of flowers, vistas, and bird songs as suitable objects of empirical knowledge would in no way help us to understand why we find such objects beautiful, not to mention give us a right to claim that others ought to as well, likewise our normal empirical experience of plants and animals as such suitable objects of knowledge would in no way help us to understand that those objects were alive, and so possessed a distinct kind of unity of parts, and a ground for such a division of living from nonliving was necessary. But the faculty of reflective judging, he concluded, could explain such possibilities, how we are responsive to what experience requires of us, without its constraining that activity.

And then a number of other issues seemed to be thrown into the same reflective judgment pot. The formulation of scientific theories not fixed or determined by empirical generalizations involved this activity and its logic, as did the systematizing of empirical laws necessary for genuine scientific knowledge. Finally, even the determination of ordinary empirical concepts now seemed to require this newly formulated reflective capacity, and in all of these cases a kind of legitimating grounding could be given, not fully anticipated in the first Critique. So reflective judging and its a priori principle were now necessary not only for explaining the possibility and validity of aesthetic judgments, but in accounting for the necessary distinction between organic and nonorganic nature, the formation of empirical concepts, the proper integration of genera and species, the general unification of empirical laws into systems of scientific law, theory formation itself, and the right way to understand the attribution of a kind of necessity to all such principles, judgments, concepts, laws, and systems. The Critique of Taste had become the Critique of the Power of Judgment.

But, as with the “Ideas of Reason,” Kant continued to hold that such reflective judging was not constitutively necessary for there being objects of experience at all, and so could not properly be called cognition. That required only that we be able to distinguish a subjective succession of representations from an objective, something that was possible only if any event was necessarily connected to another prior event. But Kant himself seems to be conceding that that result alone amounts to an impoverished notion of cognition, Erkenntnis, and it seems arbitrarily restricted. We wouldn’t know much if we knew only that, without empirical concepts, laws, systems, and distinctions between living and nonliving. So all the above products of reflective judgment must count as necessary and indispensable, and in a way that is not just convenient, but nevertheless remains merely regulative. Given their necessity and indispensability, given how much we would miss in the world if we could not claim we know that things fall into kinds (that there are empirical concepts), that nature is law-governed with necessity, that species fall under genera, and that some beings are alive, the Hegelian question is: Why does Kant persist, even after the expansion of his system in the third Critique, in claiming that we do not really know any of these things, that we just require them of ourselves and can’t see a way to abandon such commitments?

One reason Kant continues to hold this has to do with how he understands the logical character of the difference between reflective and determining judgments themselves. But, as we saw, Hegel implies that the way Kant has described the situation—given a particular, find the universal—is misleadingly “external.” Any so-called ascent is not really external to the instance being reflected on. Any putative result must already be the “true being” (eigentliches Seyn) in the first place. The way this distinction is sketched, as one between a strictly separate determining judgment—the supposed application of a universal to a particular—and a reflective judgment, understood as “given a particular, find the universal,” is not credible. There is no way to understand the particular as “external” to the power of reflection like this. Independent of the determination by its concept, such a particular isn’t anything determinate at all; it provokes a search for its universal, on the assumption that it has not been classified as a kind, but there is nothing to guide or direct such a search. Distinguishing the relevant properties among the detectable properties cannot be accounted for in such a model. (Hence the similarity to the basic problem of essence in chapter 6.)

We should note again Hegel’s formulation of that basic problem.

Reflection thus finds an immediate before it which it transcends and from which it is the turning back. But this turning back is only the presupposing of what was antecedently found. (11.252)

And,

This antecedent comes to be only by being left behind; its immediacy is sublated immediacy.—The sublated immediacy is, contrariwise, the turning back into itself, essence that arrives at itself, simple being equal to itself. This arriving at itself is thus the sublating of itself and self-repelling, presupposing reflection, and its repelling of itself from itself is the arriving at itself. (11.252)

Longuenesse has shown that judgment in the first Critique, often assumed to be purely determinative (as in the question of whether the categories “apply” to sensible objects), always also has a reflective character, in the manner suggested here.28 But it is not clear from what she says how the two functions, “find the particular for the universal” and “find the universal for the particular,” are jointly active, rather than successive (something that would not make much sense). She also isolates the third Critique as concerned with “merely reflective judgments,” and this because the search for a universal fails. No determinate application, no determinative judgment, would be possible. Aesthetic reflective judgments give us only “purposiveness without a purpose.” But while it is true that teleological judgments can never arrive at a final purpose for nature as a whole, that does not mean that we cannot settle on, and then apply, determinate concepts of purpose for leukocytes, protoplasm, the liver, and so forth. So the question of their joint activity is just as pressing in the third Critique as it is in the first.

This can all sound like a puzzling circularity, but it bears directly on Kant’s skepticism about the objectivity of the concept of life. For Kant, a living being requires us to think something we cannot, how the whole causes the parts that cause it. (He certainly agrees that this can make no sense; it is meant as a reductio.) But this simply assumes not just the distinguishability of whole and parts but their temporal separability.29 However, a living being’s reproduction according to kind makes clear that in such reproduction there is no puzzle about the production of parts that make a whole possible that then also makes the parts possible by causing them. The generation of whole and parts is simultaneous, as in all cases of final causality. The reciprocal relation between whole and parts exists from the moment of conception, and the only real causation is efficient causation, internally in the organism’s processes and generatively. These causal series, however, cannot explain reproduction according to kind, the unity of an organism, the regularity of the occurrences of the series, or even the lawfulness of nature. We therefore propose judgments about the series, we systematize the series in a way that need not presuppose a creator or bizarre temporal relations but must see them as rule-bound or norm-bound to avoid unmanageable contingency.30 We have of course a much better understanding today of how the DNA “blueprint” is actualized, but the sequences alone still require us to think of what is happening as a defined process with a beginning and an end, as the growth of an individual of a kind. Thinking we can understand the parts causing the whole and in a separate moment, some sort of backward causation moment, the whole causing the parts is not the discovery of a solution to a problem but its question-begging invention, question-begging with regard to final-cause explanation that does not rely on a designer or on forward and backward causation. It is an explanation that explains by reference to a concept. (“Because that is what leukocytes are for.”)31 Kant’s argument is that we would not even understand what we were claiming unless we were making appeal to an entity “as if designed,” but that argument rests on his invocation of a form of causality we cannot understand except by analogy with design according to concepts, and Hegel sees no reason for such a commitment in understanding living beings.32 There is a whole because of the parts by virtue of efficient causation. But there are parts because of the whole in a different sense of “because.” The thing’s concept is necessary for its specification as the thing-kind it is, and without this concept, we could not even identify the parts as parts. This is not an equivocation; it is doing justice to the two sorts of dependence in their joint realization.

Much of Hegel’s relation to Kant’s doctrines has just this air of reducing or eliminating oppositional tensions. The most famous in recent years has been the concept-intuition relation (again distinguishable but not separable) and the relation between pure practical reason and sensible inclination, which Hegel aspires in the same way to “unify” rather than oppose.

There is nonetheless a reasonable response from Kant or a Kantian. It concerns the status of a form of understanding “by reference to a concept” like the one above about leukocytes. Since the modern revolution in philosophy we have come to be skeptical about this, imagining someone answering the question, “Why did the book fall?” with “Because it is in the nature of heavy things to fall.” Or we think the questions are impossibly ambitious (“What is the natural end of human being?”) or too easy to abuse (“because she is a woman”). But bad applications don’t invalidate the notion.

Such bad examples do not rule out the prospect for a philosophical inheritance of such remarks by Aristotle as:

And since the existence of the thing must already be given, it is clear that the question must be why the matter is so-and-so. For instance, the question may be ‘Why are these things here a house?’ (And the answer is ‘Because what being is for a house belongs to them’), or it may be ‘Why is this thing here a man?,’ or ‘Why is this body in this state a man?’ So what is sought is the cause by which the matter is so-and-so, i.e. the form. And that is the substance.33

Hegel certainly signs on:

the nature, the specific essence, that which is truly permanent and substantial in the manifold and accidentality of appearance and fleeting externalization, is the concept of the thing, the universal which is present in it. (21.15)

One final comment. If the question we are left with is “What counts as satisfactory comprehension?” then any answer will require our exploration of the concept of comprehension. Only the concept of comprehension can explain what a comprehension is. Hegel’s unusual language about all this gets at something: the concept is self-determining; it gives itself its own actuality. As we have seen, it is a notion indispensable to properly philosophic comprehension and to questions about the nature of religion, or art, or thinking. There are no empirical answers to such questions, and it is dissatisfying to be told that we are asking a question about language, linguistic usage, meaning. No, we’re not. We are asking what art, what thinking, what being alive, and so forth are. It is equally (and needlessly) dissatisfying to be told that any putative result has only a subjective necessity, that we still don’t know what thinking or explaining, etc., really is. Only thinking can determine what it is to be thinking or, on this approach, what it is to be living. Philosophy cannot go on as philosophy in undue and unnecessary “fear of the object.”

 
    