5
# THE LOGIC OF BEING: THE “GIVEN” AS A LOGICAL PROBLEM
The Beginning
Hegel accepts a distinction fundamental to Western rationalism, indeed fundamental to metaphysics in the Western tradition. He clearly concedes that we can learn such things as why someone did something, why a fire started, or what the human kidney is for only empirically. But we cannot be said to learn empirically that actions are bodily movements describable intentionally (or intentional under some description, that this is what makes such movements actions), that every event necessarily succeeds some other event according to a rule that, qua rule, has a general form, a type-type claim of causal connection, or that parts of organisms have purposes and must be explained in terms of those purposes, or that some actions are good, others not. We learn empirically that this or that being has this or that quality, but we cannot learn empirically what it is for qualities to inhere in substances, substances that cannot themselves inhere in anything, or that there must be this distinction. We shall see later that these claims properly make up the domain of what Hegel calls “judgments,” from which he distinguishes mere propositions, but the obvious question has always been: if the ground for any such claim is not empirical, what could it be?

The first Denkbestimmung under interrogation in the SL is perhaps the most famous of the questions that belong in the “nonempirical” category, and, famously, the most elusive. In fact, Hegel begins his book with his own version of this elusiveness, and so begins with a kind of Hegelian irony, one that is subtle to the point of invisibility. The first “thought-determination,” Denkbestimmung, to be considered is the concept “Being,” Sein. We begin in effect at the beginning of philosophy, with “Father Parmenides” and so with the beginning of Western rationalism. Parmenides reasoned (a good candidate for the first philosophical or metaphysical thought) that all that could be intelligibly thought is “what there is,” Being, so that is all there could be. Not-being could not be intelligibly thought; it was unintelligible, alogos, and therefore could not be. But that meant that anything that relied on the possibility of intelligible not-being could not be as well. And that meant that both differentiation (something not-being another), and change (something changing from a state of not-being something to being something else, or from being to not-being) could not be, despite the appearances. Nothing was different from anything else, and nothing ever changed. Even saying what is not, false judgments, could not really be on such an account, despite appearances, despite “The Way of Seeming.”

Hegel accepts the challenge of the hypothesis, the thought of anything at all, or in his terms “indeterminate immediacy,” as his beginning. (As throughout, by the thought of anything at all, we do not mean the mere entertaining of some possibility. We mean the possible knowledge of anything at all, and so a form of judgment.) Parmenides reasoned that not being could not be, so being was indeterminate, unlimited, and unchanging. Hegel reasons (and here the irony) that, on the contrary, such a thought entails that not-being can not but be, since by thinking mere Being so understood, we think not anything at all, but nothing, Nichts.

This beginning, Hegel emphasizes, must be “presuppositionless,” and some commentators have noted that this insistence alone might allow us to understand the opening logical movement of the book, that the implications of such a strong insistence on presuppositionlessness can be understood to “drive” the development forward. But we have already seen that Hegel does not believe there is such a thing as absolute presuppositionlessness. That would amount to something like an oracular manifestation: “Being!” And from such a moment nothing would follow. Besides, we already know from the previous chapter that there is a certain theoretical and a certain practical presupposition clearly made for the enterprise of the Logic to make any sense. To repeat the passage:

But if no presupposition is to be made, if the beginning is itself to be taken immediately, then the only determination of this beginning is that it is to be the beginning of logic, of thought as such. There is only present [vorhanden] the resolve [Entschluß], which can also be viewed as arbitrary [Willkühr], of considering [betrachten] thinking as such. (21.56)

We have presupposed “thought as such,” and we have presupposed the resolve to consider “thinking as such.” So, to make as explicit as possible both such starting points, we have to say that the opening as such is the resolve to attempt to think Being as such. (The grammar is important. That is, it is the resolve to grasp, directly apprehend such an object of thought.) This is what will fail (or more precisely, will prove itself to be incomplete as a possible thought), stated in those terms, and through that failure we learn that any thinking must be the attempt to think that being as such is X or Y or whatever. We learn the essential discursivity of thought and the first determination of being as such, determinacy, articulability. (This lesson is what Aristotle wants us to learn when he argues that being as such cannot be a highest genus. There can be, by definition, no higher-order predicate by which such a being could be determined as what it is. This is, I want to claim, the same lesson we are to learn at the beginning of Hegel’s Logic.)

One can think of the matter this way. If the question is “What is it simply to be?” (Heidegger’s “What is the meaning of Being?” without the misleading substantivization of the infinitive in English), it would seem impossible to avoid concluding that to be is always to be something or other, to be determinate. Otherwise, whatever there is could not be distinct from anything else that is. Being would not be bounded off as just the thought of being and nothing else. But a being’s determinacy is nothing other than, the other side of the same coin as, its determinability by thought, its being discriminable as what it distinctly is, as it could be put—all in the light of the interpretation offered here of EL §24.1 To be is to be intelligible. Its determinacy simply amounts to a thing’s distinguishability from what it is not, or the moment in which a particular event occurs, not any other moment. And herein lies Parmenides’s famous problem. This would, as noted, appear to commit us to the existence of “what is not,” since any determinate A, by not being B, seems to make use of “not being B,” and not-being cannot be. (It does not, of course; this all rests on a confusion between not-being as not being anything, not existing, and being as being other than, and so being something else, as Plato demonstrated in The Sophist, but we are starting at a level of abstraction where we must take the problem on. Hegel will agree with the Eleatic Stranger’s claim that Parmenides misunderstood his own thought.) The same goes for something changing from one moment to the next (to “not that moment”). Hence, Parmenides’s confusion: no differentiability, no change, despite appearances.

The Strategy
With all this in mind, here is an attempt to sketch how I understand the opening claim of the SL. (And I am going to limit myself to the opening moment, and even at that to the question of the way Hegel’s discussion illuminates his understanding of the relationship between logic and metaphysics.) We begin with an attempt to assume nothing about determinacy and determinations. The idea is to begin with the thought of anything at all, in its immediate indeterminacy, simply being, Sein. But the thought of anything at all in its immediate indeterminacy is not the thought of anything; the object of such thought is nothing, Nichts. Nothing is excluded, so nothing is included. Quine is right: the answer to “what is there?” is easy. “Everything.” But the attempted thought of immediate indeterminacy has a different content than the thought that the content of such a determination is nothing. (As many critics have pointed out, if this were not so, the two thoughts would be simply equivalent and the Logic would “stop.”) It is a failed thought, not the thought of this failure or even just the enactment of the failure. This is the beginning of everything of significance in the Logic; it (the thought of Sein being nothing other than Nichts) is the reflective relation to what is being thought that is inseparable from anything possibly being thought. It is thought’s apperceptive moment. Anyone truly thinking the thought of indeterminate immediacy is just thereby thinking what it could be to think such a thought, as discussed in chapter 3 here. Just thereby, thinking is thinking its failure to be thinking, not thinking of a strange object, Nichts. It is only in this sense that the first moment has a second moment, a realization of what thinking must think to be thinking of anything: in general, determinate being (Dasein), and so the conditions of determinacy, which at the minimum level turn out to be qualitative and quantitative predicates, and their relation to each other in a category Hegel calls measure (Maß). But this all refers to a content determinately distinguished from what it is not, a something as opposed to an (its) other, finite being in its contrastive relation with infinity, the one in its relation to the many.

All of this is in keeping with what he wrote about the development or progression of the moments of the book. In EL §17, Hegel says that the “unique purpose, deed and goal” of his science is “to arrive at the Concept of the concept and so to arrive at its return [into itself] and contentment [Befriedigung].” And in the addition to §83 he says simply, “Only the Concept is what is true, and, more precisely, it is the truth of Being and of Essence. So each of these, if they are clung to in their isolation, or by themselves, must be considered at the same time as untrue.” This is the process we begin in the logic of being.

Such a reflective determination reveals both that such putative immediate indeterminacy must itself already be a determination,2 and that such a putative content, anything at all in its immediate indeterminacy, has not been transformed, has not “become” Nichts, but that it always already was, had always already, as Hegel puts it, already “gone over” into Nichts. (As noted before, determination, bestimmen, can mean anything from any sort of specification of determinacy to something much closer to a fundamental, basic, or essential determination, as in the frequent translation of Fichte’s Die Bestimmung des Menschen as The Vocation of Man. That latter essentialist possibility will now begin to be much more important.)3

He puts this point and the dual-level structure of all the moments in the Logic in an unusual way that nevertheless clearly descends from the apperceptive character of judgment as a logical claim:

Thus it is the whole concept which we must consider, first as existent Concept [seyender Begriff], and then as concept; in the one case it is concept only implicitly, in itself, the concept of reality or being; in the other, it is the concept as such, the concept that exists for itself . . . Accordingly, the first division must be between the logic of the concept as being and of the concept as concept, or (if we want to avail ourselves of otherwise familiar, but very indeterminate and therefore very ambiguous expressions) in objective and subjective logic. (SL 21.46)4

I take him to be saying here what was glossed above as the opening move: “Anyone truly thinking the thought of indeterminate immediacy is just thereby thinking what it could be to think such a thought . . . Just thereby, thinking is thinking its failure to be thinking, not thinking of a strange object, Nichts” (“in the one case it is concept only implicitly, in itself, the concept of reality or being; in the other, it is the concept as such, the concept that exists for itself).

Another formulation:

Whatever richer name be given to it than is expressed by mere being, the only legitimate consideration is how such an absolute enters into discursive knowledge [denkende Wissen] and the enunciation of this knowledge. (21.64)

This emphasis on showing the discursive nature of knowledge of any kind is no doubt the reason he begins the book with a sentence fragment, the linguistic representation of a thought that is, can be, no true thought, as signaled by its fragmentary linguistic representation. As it stands, it is a bit oracular or vatic, or at least like a chapter or division heading, not a part of the book proper. But it is not a title. It is the first “moment” of the book proper. “Being, pure being—without further determination” is what Hegel wrote (21.68). (In the EL, the beginning is less dramatic. He just states that being is the “concept in itself,” and so must be developed. He calls that development a Heraussetzen, a “setting out” that already links intelligibility to discursive intelligibility [§84].)

We recall how important this notion was in chapter 3, and Hegel here is doing something like making a case for, or at least in some way showing us, the apperceptively discursive nature of any possible discursive intelligibility. This also means that in judging anything, I am always also implicitly holding open the possibility of the self-correction of judging. (For anything to count as an instance of a correction of a judgment, it must count as a self-correcting.) That is, just being in the state of judging incorrectly, and then coming to be in the state of judging correctly, is not thereby self-correcting. Or, any judgment always implicitly applies, is implicitly applying, the concept of judgment to itself. It is a judgment because I, and nothing other than I, make it the case that I judge—that I, and nothing other than I, commit myself, one could say (Fichte’s “self-positing”).

As Kant insisted, in any such case I must be able to “stand above” what I judged and what I now judge correctly and take the latter to be a correction of the former in order for it to be that, a correction. Otherwise, there is just a succession of episodes. This is why he could say that the understanding, the power of claiming, is the synthetic unity of apperception (in the same way, I am ultimately claiming in this book, Hegel is claiming that what he calls the concept is the synthetic unity of apperception). As in Kant’s explanation:

“Bodies are heavy.” By that, to be sure, I do not mean to say that these representations necessarily belong to one another in the empirical intuition, but rather that they belong to one another in virtue of the necessary unity of the apperception in the synthesis of intuitions, i.e. in accordance with the principles of the objective determination of all representations insofar as cognition can come from them, which principles are all derived from the principle of the transcendental unity of apperception. (CPR B142)

This also means, as we have been stressing, that given certain concepts of the power of knowing—say, a knowing that must be indeterminate and immediate, a “resolve” to begin with that notion—we already have thereby the concept of the object of such pure knowing, Being. If we are talking about a case of knowing, as we are, the two are, must be, inseparable (all in keeping with the interpretation of the “identity of thought and being” presented in chapter 2). There is no question, here or anywhere in the Logic, of the need to “move” from the order of knowing to the order of being. If that were claimed to be necessary, how would we have begun with a case of knowing?5 Hegel himself notes this frequently when he summarizes what is going on by referring to either order. For example:

There is nothing to be intuited in it, if one can speak here of intuiting; or, it is only this pure empty intuiting itself. Just as little is anything to be thought in it, or, it is equally only this empty thinking. (21.69, my emphasis)

Note again, this is not the introduction of a strange content, Nichts. It is the claim that nothing is being thought in “thinking being.” It is a thinking that is not really a thinking. As he will say later (at 11.246), the putative opening is just Schein, a showing in which nothing is shown.

Expressed at the order of knowing, this all reflects the great shift from pre-Kantian rationalism to post-Kantian idealism. To use Brandom’s formulation, the question of adequate knowledge shifts from our having grasped some content or object (how clearly and distinctly we can see it or how firmly grasp it) to the nature of the object’s claim on us, or to the authority, legitimacy of our claim to know, our right to make such a claim and the nature of that right, not what the character of the mental relation is between the mind and its object. Seeing something in perception, for example, can be a ground for such a claiming. “How do you know there is a robin in that tree?” “Because I saw it.” But then—and here is the tricky part—it must also be the case that what we see or grasp be of such a form that it accords with or fits in with, can be intelligible in, such forms of claims as we can make. It need not itself have strictly judgmental form, but it must be such as could be rendered intelligible in the content of a judgmental claim.6 So there is no objection in Kant or among the relevant post-Kantians, in their denial that thinking is a kind of perceiving or primarily receptive, to the general form of such claims as “I know it because I saw it,” especially because that is the invitation to establishing that it can be seen by anyone. That is how it functions as perceptual ground. But for thinking as such, there is nothing like: “I know that is the essence because I had an essence-intuition, a Wesenschau.” Establishing, at the level of thought alone, that an essence is X or Y can be done only discursively, if at all.

Fichtean Formulations
This is the structure that becomes explicit, for itself, in the logic of essence, and it will allow a direct discussion about the reflected or two-level (essence and appearance) character of being, of what could be truly known. It is even clearer there that any such essence is never seen or intuited but posited, something that will give rise to its own problems here in the next chapter. But this reflective dimension is implicit and appealed to in the logic of being, and Hegel often tries to clarify his point by reference to Fichte. This is not the most pellucid path to insight about the issue, but it is possible to restate what he is trying to say. In his 1794 Wissenschaftslehre, Fichte insists on the same point that is made in the first move in the Logic (a move that turns out not to be a move but something like an always already made move) by pointing out the difference logically between “A” and “A = A.” For the latter, we need (for its thinkability at all, and so for the intelligibility of any A, a condition [its identity as itself] of its being determinately A), an “I” that is “= I.” (This is the claim we saw above in Hegel’s terms: that being itself is only the concept in itself; the concept must become for itself as the thought that being is such and such.) But this identification is something done, a Tat, the equivalent here of “bringing contents to the unity of apperception” in Kant’s account, an active unifying necessary for the I to be continuously that I in experience. (Thinking is a productive power.) Fichte needed a new word for the full expression of a thinking, a pure spontaneity, a productive power, that is always also the consciousness of thinking: Tathandlung.

But, as he also notes, this first principle, A = A, is not possible unless it has also made possible the thought A ≠ ~A. This requires that we understand how the I posits the not-I and itself (the Fichtean equivalent to the necessity of a concept-intuition distinction). This is probably far enough into Fichte to make the initial point about positing and negating in their connection with the apperception point. (We can see the parallel with Hegel in the third basic principle: for any A to be distinguished from ~A, we need the logical principle of Bestimmung, determination, which Fichte calls divisibility or determinability, or as we might say, Teilbarkeit. Kant’s transcendental unity of apperception reappears as Fichte’s self-positing I, and again as Hegel’s Begriff.) Another way to put the Fichtean version, given that there can be no beginning with simply “being as it is in itself,” but rather such a presuppositionless beginning must be “thinking being,” is that the beginning proper is positing, the Fichtean general term for thinking, the analogue of which on the objective side must be “determinacy,” an A that is not ~A, Hegel’s term for which is Werden, becoming.

Of course, the notion of becoming immediately suggests a temporal development, and that seems to capture the idea of something at the same time being and not being, as in being what state it is in, but always becoming other than that state, as in any living being’s always also dying, or at least changing, developing, deteriorating. But Hegel means the term to refer to a more general logical feature of determinacy in general, as in this important passage, which I will quote in full. When he wants to explain what he takes the beginning to show, his language is not linked to anything necessarily temporal.

However, anything which it says over and above simple immediacy would be something concrete, and this concrete would contain a diversity of determinations in it. But, as already remarked, the enunciation and exposition of this concrete something is a process of mediation which starts with one of the determinations and proceeds to another, even though this other returns to the first—and this is a movement which, moreover, is not allowed to be arbitrary or assertoric. Consequently, that from which the beginning is made in any such exposition is not something itself concrete but only the simple immediacy from which the movement proceeds. Besides, what is lacking if we make something concrete the beginning is the demonstration which the combination of the determinations contained in it requires. (21.64–65)

In other words, the “movement” Hegel introduces is what he always refers to as logical movement, development, logical life, even “pulsation.” This will be discussed later in chapter 7. When he introduces that notion in this context, it is clear that he is referring to such logical movement, and that, paradoxically, any use of the temporal image is of something that has always already occurred. He even explicitly stresses this odd temporal point.

Pure being and pure nothing are therefore the same. The truth is neither being nor nothing, but rather that being has passed over into nothing and nothing into being—“has passed over” [übergegangen], not passes over [übergeht]. But the truth is just as much that they are not without distinction; it is rather that they are not the same, that they are absolutely distinct yet equally unseparated and inseparable, and that each immediately vanishes in its opposite. Their truth is therefore this movement of the immediate vanishing of the one into the other: becoming, a movement in which the two are distinguished, but by a distinction which has just as immediately dissolved [aufgelöst] itself. (21.69)7

To return to Fichte, Hegel is wary of putting things that Fichtean way cited above, partly because he thinks that Fichte has left unclear how the “subject-object” opposition most of all typical of limited, Verstand-thinking is to be understood (as Hegel thinks he has done in his Phenomenology), partly because he thinks announcing a beginning as something like “thinking being” invites treating the issue as a matter of psychology. Here is how he puts his wariness.

In this connection, there is the further essential observation to be made that, although the “I” might well be determined to be in itself pure knowledge or intellectual intuition and declared to be the beginning, in science we are not concerned with what is present in itself or as something inner, but with the determinate being [Dasein] rather of what in thought is inner and with the determinateness [Bestimmtheit] which this inner assumes in that existence. (21.64, translation modified)8

His point is that if we understand the presuppositionless beginning in more idealist terms, beginning with the I, this already presupposes a distinction between I and not-I, and that is a distinction that must be made. Seeing that is seeing the first lesson in the necessity of determinacy, and it is basically the same point Hegel makes when his argument shows that any such beginning must be Dasein, determinate being (or the tode ti, in Aristotle’s terms), something that allows us to “unfold” the conditions of such necessary determinacy. This original duality between Nichts and Sein, now that, from chapter 4, we can understand what Hegel means by considering thinking itself as a negating, will assume a very general importance. It is the duality between mediation and immediacy, differentiation and unity, and form and what is formed, and amounts to the core argument of the Logic (the inseparability yet distinguishability of these moments). The issue will now rise to a kind of prominence and self-consciousness in the crucial treatment of ground, Grund. (Form will be the “ground” of both “unity” and “difference.”)9

Put another way: a concept conceived as “empty of content,” and so not the thought of anything determinate, is the thought of anything at all. And since that is the thought of nothing in particular, we assume that it must acquire such a content extraconceptually. But the concept of a conceptually unmediated mere matter is no content in particular, and must assume some conceptual differentiation to be any determinate content at all.10 It is all very well to say that Kant gets himself into this trouble by an abstract separation of concept from intuition as distinct contributors to experience, but the only resolutive response possible introduces the concept of a “mediated immediacy,” which in the Logic is called “becoming,” Werden. That, though, is not a resolution but a difficult problem, as we shall see below, a paradox that brings us all the way back to the statement of method in the introduction.

What we must try to understand to be happening in this claim is the following:

The one thing needed to achieve scientific progress—and it is essential to make an effort at gaining this quite simple insight into it—is the recognition of the logical principle that negation is equally positive, or that what is self-contradictory does not resolve itself into a nullity, into abstract nothingness, but essentially only into the negation of its particular content; or that such a negation is not just negation, but is the negation of the determined fact which is resolved, and is therefore determinate negation; that in the result there is therefore contained in essence that from which the result derives—a tautology indeed, since the result would otherwise be something immediate and not a result. Because the result, the negation, is a determinate negation, it has a content. It is a new concept but one higher and richer than the preceding—richer because it negates or opposes the preceding and therefore contains it, and it contains even more than that, for it is the unity of itself and its opposite.—It is above all in this way that the system of concepts is to be erected—and it has to come to completion in an unstoppable and pure progression that admits of nothing extraneous.

An Extended Analogy
What I propose to do at this point is to approach the issue of the beginning argument with an extended analogy to another dimension of the same point, made in the PhG about immediacy, but which can be called in general the Hegelian problem with “the given” in epistemological terms, “immediacy” in logical terms.11

There is an extended apagogic argument in the first three chapters of Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit that is meant to show the impossibility of any model of experiential knowledge that is understood to be based on a foundation that consists simply in the direct sensory presence of the world to the mind, a putative consciousness of a content that is contentful just by being passively apprehended, contentful on its own, in no relation to any other or any remembered content. By imagining such a model and showing that it has some inner incoherence or necessarily raises a question that cannot be answered in its terms, Hegel shows that the possibility of any such determinate consciousness requires a capacity beyond mere differential responsiveness, a capacity that, among other things, allows a perceiver to track, keep attending to, any such content over time, and that allows the perceiver to fulfill a condition of such determinacy: that the differentiability of such content from what is other than it must also be possible. This is supposed to establish the impossibility of any epistemological atomism, and to undermine any idea of a strict separability between our sensible and intellectual faculties. This is so because fulfilling these conditions on experiential determinacy requires, he wants to show, the exercise of spontaneous conceptual capacities in perception itself. This is all not in any way a denial of our reliance on direct sensible contact with objects in gaining empirical knowledge, or a denial of the difference between sensible and intellectual capacities. It is meant as a denial that such sensory receptivity can properly play its role in a model of empirical knowledge all on its own, conceived as independent of, or prior to, as he would say, any conceptual mediation. This treatment in the PhG is a useful analog because Hegel tells us directly in the remark to EL §84 that the treatment in the EL is the logical version of the general problem of “sensory consciousness.”

But Hegel also wants to pose such an issue at a different level of abstraction, and he is right to understand that the more abstract formulation is primary, is that on which the conceptual coherence of his favored account of experience ultimately depends. That prior, more abstract formulation of the logical formulability of any such given is what we have introduced in the previous section. The problem at what Hegel would call the logical level is how we are to understand the conceptual possibility appealed to in this summary, the possibility of a mediated immediacy. The notion is obviously problematic in its very formulation. If any such immediacy is to be considered as mediated, then it is not immediate. A canceled event is not a kind of happening, a kind of event. The event did not happen. A mediated immediacy is no longer an immediacy. Hegel points directly to this problem. (Or to the issue; he does not yet announce it as a problem or even as paradoxical.)

The beginning of philosophy must be either something mediated or something immediate, and it is easy to show that it can be neither the one nor the other; so either way of beginning runs into contradiction. (21.53)

Or, on the following page:

Here we may quote from it [he is talking about a passage from the Encyclopedia] only this, that there is nothing in heaven or nature or spirit or anywhere else that does not contain [enthält] just as much immediacy as mediation, so that both these determinations prove to be unseparated and inseparable and the opposition between them nothing real. (21.54)

Obviously “contained” (enthält) is a metaphor; the task is to understand the meaning of the metaphor.

A mediated, say, a conceptually articulated, content can of course be further mediated, or articulated. But preserving the informatively sensory dimension of empirical knowledge seems to require (once we accept the “distinct but not separable” point) a notion of mediated immediacy. But if we mean, as many have, that the expression summarizes a temporal dynamic, that what had been immediately apprehended, was then mediated, then we have lost hold both of the claim made earlier above (see his “unseparated and inseparable”), and of the opening arguments of Hegel’s Phenomenology. That argument has ruled out such an independent step, or any such two-step account. So the problem is not merely how there can be distinguishable but not separably occurring elements in some whole, like, say, pitch and timbre in a musical note, distinguishable but never occurring separately. The problem is how the logical or conceptual character of this relation between activity and receptivity is to be understood, if not in this stepwise way. Hegel’s formulations of the problem seem to take delight in forcing the issue into terms that are initially bewildering.

Immediacy of knowledge is so far from excluding mediation, that the two things are linked together—immediate knowledge being actually the product and result of mediated knowledge. (EL §66)

Brandom on Immediacy
One brief example of not attending to this problem as such is the following. Brandom, in his online, constantly revised manuscript on the Phenomenology,12 carefully and rightly follows a Sellarsian line in distinguishing in Hegel between the immediacy of the act of apprehending (it is noninferential) and any putative immediacy of determinate content (a mere illusion), and then gives his own interesting spin to the issue of what is going wrong with the latter assumption (he describes it as a claim to immediate authority without a corresponding responsibility), but he still speaks frequently of “incorporating the deliverances of immediacy into the mediated structure of contents. These noninferential applications of concepts . . . are wrung from or elicited by the particulars to which the concepts are on that occasion applied.” And he speaks often of a mediation that articulates an immediacy.

And so we get formulations like: “Immediate judgments express a dimension along which particulars exert an authority over the universals or concepts that apply to them.” By his lights, this has to mean that

perceptual observations of things in general are not merely immediate, but they are noninferentially elicited, and so provide a crucial friction for the inferentially articulated Concept: a kind of constraint without which the determinate contentfulness of ordinary empirical concepts would be unintelligible.13

He is right to think that his formulations should be glossed this way, but we are here moving rapidly away from Hegel and toward Brandom’s own theory of such a two-stage or two-ply process, his “RDRD account,” basically a nonconceptual, matter-of-fact sensory encounter.14 Without a clarification of the notion of mediated immediacy, this is inevitable. And any two-step process is always going to open up an unsatisfactory gap, at least by Hegelian lights. (In Hegel’s account, experience is not guided or elicited or provoked by sensations. Experience is sensory awareness, and can be sensory awareness, only of particular objects and events, only if that capacity originally involves the power of discrimination, a conceiving power, actualized sensorily.) But the issues are hardly clear-cut. Hegel sometimes himself seems to understand all of this as a two-step process. From the Encyclopedia Logic: “thinking is in fact essentially the negation of something immediately given” (in der Tat ist das Denken wesentlich die Negation eines unmittelbar Vorhandenen [EL §12A]). This, even though in the same paragraph he denies that these moments are ever distinct and insists that they are always “inseparably bound together” (in unzertrennlicher Verbindung).

Recalling the Interpretation
Let me begin by summarizing the main points of the interpretation so far presented.

(i) The Science of Logic is the science of pure thinking. Pure thinking’s object is itself, what it is to be thinking (where this must also include, at an a priori level, what it is for thought to have objects at all), and is pure in the sense that it is not aided by empirical experience.

(ii) The forms of thought studied by philosophy are the forms without which a thing could not be intelligible as what it is (where what it is is a determinate something). We study the intelligibility of what there is by studying judgmental, essentially predicative form.

(iii) The Logic’s subject matter, what it is trying to make sense of, are the modalities of sense-makings. But, given that Hegel thinks of such modalities of sense-making not as a species-specific “subjective” capacity, but as constitutive of any possible sense, he would not say that this can be distinguished from “making sense of things.” (This is another way of saying that logic, properly understood, is metaphysics.)

(iv) Kant pioneered a way of returning to Aristotle’s treatment of logic, or a theory of concepts as a kind of metaphysics, without the commitments of rationalist dogmatism. But Kant could not deal adequately with the questions that the approach raises: How do we determine what those conditions are? And can they be rightly confined to what the avoidance of logical contradiction will allow, can the “emptiness” that Kant ascribes to these forms be maintained? Stated in Kant’s terms, Hegel’s claim is that general logic, properly understood, is already transcendental logic, properly understood, and transcendental logic, properly understood, is already metaphysics.

(v) This all places enormous pressure on what amounts to a kind of operator in Hegel’s Logic on which all the crucial transitions depend, something like: “would not be fully intelligible, would not be coherently thinkable, without . . .” What follows the “without” is some more comprehensive concept, a different distinction, and so forth. Excluding logical contradictions would be one obvious instantiation of the operator. But as we noted in chapter 2, the domain of the logically possible is obviously far more extensive than the range of what Kant called the “really possible.” The latter is what we need if we are to have a logic of the real. And Hegel cannot avail himself of Kant’s nonconceptual forms of intuition to establish a priori the sensible conditions that set the boundaries of “the really possible.”

(vi) Hegel’s debt to Aristotle is again relevant, especially now in avoiding “subjective idealism,” or what I have sometimes called “impositionism.” Entities are the determinate entities they are “in terms of” or “because of” their concept or substantial form. That is, such a form (or kind) accounts for such determinacy. Such entities embody some measure of what it is truly to be such a thing, and instantiate such an essence to a greater or lesser degree. To say that an object is “for its form” is just to say that there is an intelligible dynamic in its development. Various aspects or elements or moments make sense in terms of the concept of the thing. This intelligible dynamic is its concept and is not something that “exists” separate from or supervening on some physical attributes and efficient causation. It just is the intelligible way a development develops; there is nothing “over and above” the development.

(vii) But we know that thinking, for Hegel, is in no sense a kind of perceiving. As in Kant, it is discursive. There is no nous pathetikos. Thinking is a productive power, spontaneity. The categorical structure of being is not simply noetically available to, transparent to, the light of reason. So in saying that pure thinking’s object is pure thinking itself, we do not mean that thinking attends to a special object or event. We have to say that it determines its own possibility, and this with respect to the possibility of thinking any determinate object.

So it would miss the point to think that, if pure thinking about anything at all were not “checked” or “constrained” by anything at all, or anything other than thought, pure thought would be somehow unregulated, producing its determinations without measure. But thinking considered purely is a productive power, and nothing can check or constrain its productions other than itself. Any other kind of constraint would not be a normative constraint. Anything of any kind that might count as a constraint is so only if taken by pure thinking to constrain it. That there cannot be anything that admits of contradictory predicates at the same time and in the same sense, and that a thinking of contradictory predicates is not a case of thinking, are two sides of the same constraint and the coin is reason’s constraint of itself. This has nothing to do with a faculty’s acknowledgments of its limits, as if it is somehow owing to our finitude that we cannot think such thoughts.

Help from Wilfrid Sellars?
With such a background, here is the logical formulation of the problem of the given as the problem of immediacy.

Being is the immediate [Das Seyn ist das Unmittelbare]. (SL 11.241)

Here I think we should say: “being” is the “given” in its logical form.

Since the goal of knowledge is the truth, what being is in and for itself, knowledge does not stop at the immediate and its determinations, but penetrates beyond it on the presupposition that behind this being there still is something other than being itself, and that this background constitutes the truth of being. (11.241)

As this passage already indicates, the logic of being is an attempt to demonstrate why there cannot be a logos of being just as such, understood as atomic contents grasped by a receptive mental or sensory power. In Hegel’s terms,

Being is Schein. The being of Schein consists solely in the sublatedness of being, in being’s nothingness; this nothingness it has in essence, and apart from its nothingness, apart from essence, it does not exist. It is the negative posited as negative. Schein is all that remains of the sphere of Being. (11.246)

The full, official form of the argument is that a distinct logic of being is impossible except if conceived within a logic of essence, which Hegel understands as “reflected being,” another statement of our most basic problem, aspects of which were already alluded to above. (To be more precise: “conceived within a logic of essence” means, ultimately, under the concept of “actuality,” the proper understanding of the relation between “essence” and “appearance,” yet another higher-order statement of the mediated immediacy problematic.)15 That alone doesn’t help us much, but seeing the problem as a problem of reflection might get us somewhere. I will make a couple of suggestions. To start, here is a typical formulation of the issue to be addressed:

The opposition between a self-standing immediacy of content or knowing and a mediation that is equally self-standing but incompatible with the former must be set aside, for one thing because it is a mere presupposition and an arbitrary assurance. Similarly, all other presuppositions or prejudices must be surrendered at the entry to science, whether they be taken from representation or from thought. For it is in science that all such determinations must first be examined and the status of them and their oppositions recognized. (EL §78)

One way to approach what Hegel is getting at is to pay attention to those many instances of the logical issue he presents in the logic of essence. Being and reflected being are one; “appearance and essence” is another version; so are matter and form, and there is an interesting and relevant discussion of Kant’s distinction between reflective and determinate judgments that we will encounter in the next chapter. Now, my suggestion in this context might seem a stretch, but I have found it very helpful and I hope it has some resonance with other readers. This is Sellars’s approach to Aristotle in an important article. It will involve my quoting two long but, for me anyway, extremely helpful paragraphs. First, this is what I take to be Sellars’s formulation of the Kantian theme of an exclusively discursive intellect, and the kind of problem caused in Aristotle by its absence. It is also Hegel’s point against the sufficiency of the logic of being as such.16

Here the guiding thread is that Aristotle’s rejection of Platonism leads him to the idea that since the fundamentum in re of the truth of “This is a K” is the K itself (i.e., this-K), rather than the fact that it is a K, there must be a form of knowing which has the K qua nameable (rather than the fact that it is a K) as its object (i.e., which combines somehow the (incombinable) characters of being a grasping of this item as a K and of being prior to the idea of its being a K (as contrasted with other actual, or possible, K’s). In other words, instead of recognizing that knowledge is ab initio the knowledge that this is a K (or that this is f), and is ab initio expressible by means of the statement “This is a K” (or “This is f”), Aristotle postulates (and he was not the last to do so) an ur-knowing which, if it had a verbal expression, would be properly expressed by a (fictitious) singular term of the form “This-K” and supposes that the thinking expressed by “This is a K,” which involves the multiple predicatable “a K,” is derivative from the direct, simple, and intuitive knowledge of this-K.17

If this is so, it is just another way to lead us back to the issue of mediated immediacy embedded in “this is a K” as what we know ab initio. But if it is true that the form-matter relation inherent in such an issue can be expressed neither as the imposition of a form on an immediate matter (or the mediation of a prior immediacy) nor as an immediate apprehension of a form-matter, K, then this also gives Sellars another way of formulating the Hegelian aperçus we have been tracking. It is compressed in this dense but illuminating passage, a kind of model of a “two that is actually a one” dialectic at stake in so much of what Hegel is about. (It helps distinguish both as elements of a unity—moments in the das Moment, element sense—as opposed to the der Moment, or temporal phase sense.)

Are we to suppose that as in the ordinary sense the spatial togetherness of two individuals (the parts) constitutes a new individual (the whole), so in the metaphorical sense a nonspatial, metaphysical, togetherness of individual matter and individual form (the “parts”) constitutes a new (and complete) individual (the “whole”)? The answer, I submit, is no, for the simple reason that the individual matter and form of an individual substance are not two individuals but one. The individual form of this shoe is the shoe itself; the individual matter of this shoe is also the shoe itself, and there can scarcely be a real distinction between the shoe and itself. What, then, is the difference between individual form and matter of this shoe if they are the same thing? The answer should, by now, be obvious. The individual form of this shoe is the shoe qua (piece of some appropriate material or other—in this case leather) serving the purpose of protecting and embellishing the feet. The individual matter of this shoe is the shoe qua piece of leather (so worked as to serve some purpose or other—in this case to protect and embellish the feet). Thus, the “parts” involved are not incomplete individuals in the real order, but the importantly different parts of the formula (piece of leather) (serving to protect and embellish the feet) projected on the individual thing of which they are true. (My emphasis)18

Sellars’s formulation of this particular immediacy-mediation point is deeply Hegelian in spirit. (It is what we need: a way of disabusing ourselves of assumptions that make it impossible to understand any modality of immediacy and mediation as inseparable even if necessarily distinguishable.) A form, like a concept, a thing’s concept, or The Concept, is not a thing but the distinct being-at-work of the whole thing, in the way in which the De Anima tells us in an analogy that the form or soul of the eye, were it a being, would be seeing. The “what appears to be two is really one” formulation is also Hegelian.

Here are Hegel’s versions of the same point. First,

Further, form presupposes a matter to which it refers. But for this reason the two do not find themselves confronting each other externally and accidentally; neither matter nor form derives from itself, is a se, or, in other words, is eternal. (11. 297)

And,

The two sides of the whole, condition and ground, are therefore one essential unity, as content as well as form. They pass into one another, or, since they are reflections, they posit themselves as sublated, refer themselves to this their negation, and reciprocally presuppose each other. But this is at the same time only one reflection of the two, and their presupposing is, therefore, one presupposing only; the reciprocity of this presupposing ultimately amounts to this, that they both presuppose one identity for their subsistence and their substrate. This substrate, the one content and unity of form of both, is the truly unconditioned; the fact in itself. (11.318)

So we are asking the wrong question from the start if we ask how two distinct elements “get put together.” There is no putting together. There is an “always already has been together.” In the same way, human beings are animals, but because they are rational animals, they are not animals in the way that nonrational animals are animals. Their animality, responsive as it is in its affective experience to reason, is already, always already, the animality of a rational creature.19

The claim that “matter,” in whatever logical register, is to be understood as always enformed and that form is always being enmattered cannot in Kantian terms be leading back to the position that sensible intuiting is a kind of thinking, and thinking is a kind of intuiting, as if along a continuum. That is what Kant has liberated us from, but the promised land requires that we think of matter and form, intuiting and thinking, as absolutely different and logically distinguishable as such, as well as inseparable within a logical whole. (So perceiving is one moment in the der Moment sense but two moments in the das Moment sense.)

This is not a wholly unfamiliar point and is often expressed in the Aristotelian tradition. The matter of a dog is not any old matter. It must already be the matter-of-a-dog, even though the flesh and bones and organs (each of which is also a form of some matter) are not, considered on their own, a dog. In a related sense, if the dog is dead, the matter is also not dog-matter, so separated from the being-at-work of the species form.20 Here is Hegel’s stab at making the point.

What appears here as the activity of form is, moreover, just as much the movement that belongs to matter itself. The determination that implicitly exists in matter, what matter is supposed to be, is its absolute negativity. [Die ansichseyen der Bestimmung oder das Sollen der Materie ist ihre absolute Negativität.] Through it matter does not just refer to form simply as to an other, but this external other is the form rather that matter itself contains locked up within itself. (11.299)

Or the “material” of a specific house-perception is, in its mode of being as potentiality, already sensory-house-perception material. But the mode of its being so is a “Sollen.”

And Hegel cites several other examples that make the two-is-one point. The appearances of an essence are not, taken singly, what the thing essentially is. They are mere appearances. Yet Hegel insists that essence is nothing other than its appearances, or is the “what it was to be” of its appearances, playing on the tense of to ti ēn einai and gewesen.21 A cube can be red or green, heavy or light, but qua cube it manifests itself as six-sided, each side same-sized squares, and that showing is what it is to be a cube, a fact that requires further specification of how a square manifests itself. A cube is what has been made manifest, understood in the proper reflective way. Or: “The German language has kept ‘essence’ (Wesen) in the past participle (gewesen) of the verb ‘to be’ (sein), for essence is past—but timelessly past—being” (11.241, my emphasis). A person’s character, her essence in that sense, cannot be understood as a mere list of what actions she has undertaken (what is immediately apparent in some context), but neither is it something other than the right reflective understanding of those actions, the mediation or reflection of that immediacy (EL §112Z). (Incidentally, this is how Hegel wants us to understand the truth in Kant’s “we only know appearances, we cannot know things in themselves.” We are therewith not talking about two worlds or two points of view, as in the recent controversy in Kant studies. There is no duality. The thing in itself is its appearances, rightly understood. There is no separate entity underlying them, even though knowing only an appearance is not—yet—knowing the essence. In that sense, Kant is exactly right. The thought of noumenal agency is just the thought of a reality that cannot sensibly, empirically appear as such, requires another modality of actuality to be understood as what it is—a practical reality. No perceived bodily movement in external, public space can be perceived thereby as a human action. But there is nothing “underneath” the bodily movement that cannot be known. We do not perceive “what makes the bodily movement an action.” We conceive it as intentional under some description, and that has its own, intellectual, conditions. An even simpler, Hegelian way to make the same point would just be to note that any piece of empirical knowledge, like the knowledge of the temperature at which a metal melts, is incomplete, cannot count fully as knowledge, because it is “conditioned,” dependent ultimately on, presupposes its place in, the systematic unity of scientific law, or ultimately dependent on the “unconditioned.” In what sense then such a conditioned law even counts as knowledge at all is a problem we need not pursue here. Any practical knowledge of the “noumenal” would, understood this way, have to count very heavily on the distinctness of practical knowledge and so “practical reality.”)

Back to Kant
But as we have seen from the beginning, the most difficult context involves the Kantian language of spontaneous mediation of the immediate, and in that context, the material we have looked at suggests that a rethinking of sorts is necessary of what we, and virtually everyone else, characterized as the Kantian innovation perhaps more important than any other: that thinking is discursive, is not itself open to the world in any direct way, qua thinking alone. There is no lumen naturale, no nous pathetikos, no Jacobi-esque flash of insight. But without some dissolving of what Hegel called the typically metaphysical or Verstand-typical either/or of receptive but blind intuition and active but empty thinking, we will not be able to explain the simplest case of concept application. In even the simplified and misleading “impositionist” interpretation of Kant that is so common, we will not be able to explain the determination of what to impose if we hold to such an exclusive disjunction. Moreover, Hegel points out early in the Logic that Kant himself could not observe such a distinction so quickly.

That is, for Kant, in the Metaphysical Deduction, thought must be able to determine its own moments or forms, not conceptualize an alien content. Accordingly, Kant announces at the very beginning of the first Critique that he is seeking what the “cognitive faculty . . . provides out of itself” (B1). This determination is not anything like the “seeing” of thought’s nature as an object; it is spontaneous, productive, but in its relation to itself determines a content. But neither is it the discursive application of a predicate to a concept of an object. And, as noted before, most suggestively for the entire enterprise of the Logic, practical reason can determine the form of a rational will that is also itself a substantive content. The self-legislation of the moral law is not volitional anarchy, and nether is it a flash of insight into the law as object; rather it is practical reason’s knowledge of “what” it is to determine its own law.

Consider one of the best examples of this logical point about immediacy and mediation, formulated in these faculty terms. This occurs in Hegel’s discussion of Kant’s distinction from the Critique of the Power of Judgment between determining and reflective judgment. As we shall see, he is looking in exactly the right spot in Kant. In a remark in the Wesenslogik, Hegel reminds us that Kant

defines judgment in general as the faculty of thinking the particular as contained under the universal. If the universal (the rule, the principle, the law) is given, then the judgment which subsumes the particular under it is determining. But if what is given is only a particular, for which it is up to the judgment to find the universal, then the judgment is reflecting. Here, too, reflection is therefore a matter of rising above the immediate to the universal. (11.254)

But if this distinction is conceived as a disjunction, matters get confusing. Every determinate judgment must also involve a reflective determination of which concept to apply, and every reflective search for a concept must already proceed from a particular sufficiently determinate to warrant the judgment for one rather than another. The two forms of judgment must be considered two moments—in the sense of elements—of one whole, not two different activities. As Hegel puts it in his own inimitable way,

[On the one hand, the immediate is determined] as particular only by being thus referred to its universal; for itself, it is only a singular or an immediate existent. But, on the other hand, that to which it is referred, its universal, its rule, principle, law, is in general that which is reflected into itself, which refers itself to itself, is the essence or the essential. (11. 254)

“Essence or the essential” here means that the particular must already be “universally determined” in some way in order to be “referred to the universal.” (As it is put: “For the universal, the principle or the rule and law to which reflection rises in its process of determination is taken to be the essence of the immediate from which the reflection began.”) Kant, for Hegel, did not fully understand the implications of his identification of these moments, but they intimate what he calls “absolute reflection,” our last example of the territory the notion of mediated immediacy leads us into.

Transcending the immediate from which reflection begins occurs rather only through this transcending; and the transcending of the immediate is the arriving at the immediate. (11.252)

This is Hegelese, but the point he is making is crucial and relatively clear. For any reflective judgment, the “ascending” search for a universal cannot begin unless the particular is already determinate enough (and that must mean conceptually determinate) for the “search” to have a determinate direction, or, really, any direction. And any subsuming, determining judgment cannot “apply” the concept unless the particular has already been apprehended in a way that “called for” the relevant concept, unless a moment of reflecting judgment has already occurred. The two moments are inseparable, and this is the model we need at the logical level if there is to be a mediated immediacy. I think this is the Kantian-Hegelian version of the point Sellars is making about Aristotle.

It is also useful to recall here that Hegel is responding here to something in Kant; he is not correcting Kant. Reflection was a topic in Kant’s logic courses, and “transcendental reflection” another topic in the first Critique, and it is possible to argue that many elements of the later topic were present in the critical project before 1790. But by isolating and highlighting the issues, by formulating the problem in a new way, as the problem of reflective judgment, Kant was noting that judgment was important for far more than “subsuming” activities or locating elements in a transcendental geography of faculties, but was a capacity required for the empirically underdetermined and—most importantly—not formalizable and not rule-guided activity by virtue of which rules, concepts, theories, and laws were first possible. In the most general sense, it was this non-rule-guided characteristic, some sort of element of free activity and even “creativity,” that could link the cognitive issues with aesthetic experience and judgment. Appreciating the beautiful was not the application of a concept, the subsumption of an individual under a concept, but a free play activity that nevertheless intimated a harmony, as if conceptually ordered, as if, but not, an instantiation of a concept of purposiveness. Kant seemed to see that there were other activities as well that could not be understood as conceptually determined or empirically guided, but that were nevertheless not arbitrary, merely subjective or heuristic, involving a “discernment” of such purposiveness that it was productive in a way necessary for empirical knowledge.

Since, as we have been noting, Kant’s general position was that “intuitions without concepts are blind,” the possibility that it was not only aesthetic experience, with its exclusion of any unity produced by the application of a concept, that seemed an unusual exception of sorts to this principle, but also concept and theory formation, systematizing, and even life and organic intelligibility that somehow “fit” into that “exception,” gave the issue considerable importance. And these are all aspects of the issue that will recur in the next chapter and in chapter 8. This new inclusion is true even if, as Kant insists, this new activity and its principle do not constitute an objective domain or Gebiet, do not ground any “doctrine,” the way the principles of the understanding constitute the realm of nature, and the way practical reason and its law constitute the realm of freedom. The necessity involved in judgment is not, he claimed, constitutive of a domain but rather something that judgment freely requires of itself. This notion of requirement, which Kant calls heautonomy, we can already see from what has been said above, will form an important link to how Hegel understands his own project (and how he thinks Kant might better have understood his own).

Finally, if we recall that for Hegel, the sublation (Aufhebung) of the immediate is the preservation in some way of the immediate, then in the same way that we can imagine that the determination of a person’s character from his deeds, from the immediate appearances, is not a once-for-all determination, but a reflective determination always attentive to future deeds and so an expanded or revised “essence,” and therewith an expanded or revised interpretations of deeds as typical or untypical, we can also imagine that in both logical and empirical determination of conceptual content, this process or movement can be better considered as a kind of oscillation in the same sense (one recalls Fichte’s word, schweben), and we will have at least a sketch of how the matter seems to Hegel. A very rough sketch, but at least a sketch.

This should provide the basis for understanding how Hegel understands the transition to the next discussion. However, in accordance with the elemental unity which is immanent in

the concept as basis, and hence in accordance with the inseparability of the concept’s determinations, such determinations, even as differentiated (the concept is posited in their difference), must also stand at least in reference to each another. There results a sphere of mediation, the concept as a system of reflected determinations, that is, of being as it passes over into the in-itselfness of the concept—a concept which is in this way not yet posited for itself as such but is also fettered by an immediate being still external to it. This sphere is the doctrine of essence that stands between the doctrine of being and of the concept.—In the general division of logic in this work, it has been included in objective logic because, although essence is indeed already inwardness, the character of subject is to be reserved nominatim for the concept. (SL 21.47)

The Becoming of Essence
The logic of being treats what will be the central problem in the book—accounting for the determinacy of being, and at the same time accounting for the pure concepts indispensable in thinking about the determinacy of anything. In the terms of Kant’s first two categorical groupings, these are quality and quantity, that is, the perceptually apprehensible qualities of being, and its quantitative measures. (The logic of essence will be in effect a sustained reflection on the categories of relation and modality, and the concept logic will treat in an extended way the concept of the concept, as Hegel keeps putting it.) This is in keeping with his general approach: to begin with the least “mediated,” least theoretically committed determination and argue for the further determinations, further theoretical commitments, without which even these relatively simpler determinations would not be possible. His basic argument in “The Becoming of Essence” is that a mere list of contingent properties and quantitative measures cannot sufficiently count as having determined any subject of those determinations as such. He adds to the complexity by also considering whether appreciating the interrelation of qualitative and quantitative determination, what he calls measure (Maß), such as how an increase in the measured quantity of heat can change, effect, qualitative determinations (ice, water, and steam, for example), will provide any help with this problem, and he concludes that it will not.

He summarizes this problem by calling it the problem of “indifference” (Gleichgültigkeit), the indifference of the subject of these predicates to the predicates, his way of saying that no true determination, true distinguishing of this from that, has occurred.

More precisely, the term refers to what has developed as the indifference in the relation between the bearer of qualitative, quantitative, and measured properties—that is, the substrate—and those determinations. The determinacy of this relation is what will interest Hegel, that it must be lawlike, not accidental, if such Denkbestimmungen are to be successfully determining. And this introduces something like essential predication, that without which the bearer of properties could not be the bearer it is.

So he is especially interested in issues like Newton’s inverse square law: Any physical quantity or intensity is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the source of that physical quantity. He tries to show in this section that its lawlike character must be genuinely lawlike (that it supports robust counterfactual inferences) and so requires a conception of necessity unavailable to the logic of being. That is, the “law” character, in order to be explanatory, must refer to something fundamentally explanatory, not just a generalization. One could say that Hegel accepts a realist philosophy of science, not a positivist one. The ultimate science will not be a list of what must happen when something else happens but will refer, for example, to the fundamental forces of the universe, in order to “ground” and so genuinely render intelligible this necessity.

The primary example of the logical issue in the history of philosophy is, again, Aristotle. A changeable, sensible thing consists of a portion of matter whose attributes are abstract particulars (the hot, the heavy, the red), among which are a privileged set: those attributes by virtue of which it belongs to a kind. We need this because we must be able to account for the intelligibility of the difference between “This primary substance is white, then red, then brown,” and “This primary substance Y ceases and primary substance X exists instead” (This wine becomes vinegar). And in accounting for primary substances, one cannot treat substantial predicates as just another version of adjectival predication. (Down that road lies a quality-less something—prime matter perhaps, although there is no instance of prime matter as such in the universe.)

So we need, in the usual sense, to be able to explain that when we say that human being is rational animal, members of that species do not just happen to have these differentiae, but “rational animal” is “identical” to what rational animal is, and so not a form of normal adjectival predication. We do not mean human being is identical with its attributes. The whole point is: we need the difference between having properties and being essentially what the properties designate. Without this difference (initially between essential and accidental predicates), we will be stuck with the problem of indifference, like Locke’s substance as a je ne sais quoi, or, later, the indifference (the lack of a determinate grounding relation) between substance and its attributes in Spinoza. In Hegel’s formulation:

The indifference which can be called absolute, however, is one which, through the negation of every determinateness of being, of quality and quantity and of their at first immediate unity, that is, of measure, mediates itself with itself to form a simple unity. Determinateness is in it still only a state, that is, something qualitative and external which has the indifference as a substrate. (21.373)

Because of this indifference, the fact that such predication involves properties that can come and go contingently, he calls the problem one of a constant “vanishing.”

But that which has thus been determined as qualitative and external is only a vanishing something; as thus external with respect to being, the qualitative sphere is the opposite of itself and, as such, only the sublating of itself. (Ibid.)

He means to point to a general feature of his account, that at this moment qualitative-quantitative predication cannot do what it was enlisted to do, specify the explicability of a thing’s being just that thing and nothing else, and this “self-sublating” is the rejection of this presumed sufficiency and the introduction of a “non-being logic,” a distinction that must be introduced to do justice to the original desideratum. So a horse is fast and strong and beautiful and six feet tall, but it becomes neither fast, nor strong, nor beautiful, and shrinks a bit with age, but it is the same horse, and we do not yet understand what it cannot lose and remain the same. This is the problem of indifference.

And, to make his point more insistently, he goes fairly deep into the possibility that the relation itself among regularly occurring properties could ground, limit, and refine a qualitative determinacy. For example, two variables can be said to be “inversely proportional” to each other, and that regularity might fix a determinacy. If all other variables are held constant, the magnitude or absolute value of one inversely proportional variable will decrease if the other variable increases, while their product (the constant of proportionality k) is always the same. That would give us something that looks much more substantial than the comings and goings of qualitative changes. So the gravitational attraction force between two point masses is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of their separation distance. The force is always attractive and acts along the line joining them from their center.

Hegel’s example is orbiting bodies, which are in elliptical orbit because the speed of the orbiting planet is greater at perihelion and decreases as it approaches aphelion, so size of orbit is in inverse proportion to the masses of the planets. The speed increases as the planet approaches perihelion, the sun, and decreases as it gets to aphelion, farthest distance away.

This is a “measure” example; the purely quantitative change, velocity, affects a qualitative change (the shape of the orbit), but what is interesting about Hegel’s objection to the putative resolution of the problem of indifference is that he notes something that is difficult to state in purely “logical” terms or conceptual terms, as we have become used to those notions. It is that the putative explanation is not really an explanation; or, it is unsatisfying. This suggests again something about the purposive nature of the processuality of the development of the SL, and that will return as an issue in chapter 7.

Note how he puts the point.

This thus indivisible independent measure is now to be more closely examined. It is immanent in all its determinations and in them it remains in unity with itself and undisturbed by them. But, since the determinacies sublated in it implicitly remain the totality, they emerge in it groundlessly. The implicit being of indifference and its existence are thus unconnected [Das Ansich der Indifferenz und daß ihr Daseyn ist unverbunden]; the determinacies show up in the indifference in an immediate manner and the indifference is in each of them entirely the same. The difference between them is thus posited at first as sublated, hence as quantitative—for this reason, therefore, not as a self-repelling; and the indifference not as self-determining, but as having and becoming the determinate being that it has only externally. (21.375, my emphasis)

The “groundlessly” and “not as self-determining” are his ways of introducing the notion that nothing is here really explained. It is not due to anything in the nature of planets, mass, gravity that this happens. So he says,

The bare fact is that in the elliptical movement of the celestial bodies their velocity accelerates as they approach perihelion and decreases as they approach aphelion. The quantitative side of this fact has been accurately established by the untiring diligence of observation and, further, it has been reduced to its simple law and formula. All that is legitimately required of a theory has thus been provided. But it did not seem sufficient to the reflection of the understanding. For the purpose of a so-called explanation of the phenomenon and its law, a centripetal and a centrifugal force have been assumed as the qualitative moments of movement along a curved line. (21.378)

But these forces are just ad hoc inventions that serve as mere placeholders and repetitions of the phenomena themselves, of simply what happens. (Readers of the Phenomenology will recognize that this is basically the same problem that occurred there at the end of its chapter 3 with “the inverted world.” And the transition it requires, to self-consciousness, is also a similar move.)22

And then he makes his point about explanation.

Further, it is evident that it is an alien force which would produce this turnabout, and this means that the sometimes accelerating, sometimes decelerating, velocity of the movement cannot be ascertained or, as it is said, explained from the assumed determination of the very factors which were assumed precisely for the sake of explaining this difference. (21.379)

This leaves us with “absolute indifference” and so the aporia of the logic of being.

This all hardly counts as a full commentary, but I hope it is enough to indicate the basic issue at stake in the move to a logic of essence, and so a “two-tiered” conception of reality, and to indicate that these reflections on the logical insufficiency of this model of explicability are taken immediately to have metaphysical implications. What there is cannot have only the characteristics allowed by a logic of being. Whatever there is, while it must have sensible qualities and quantitative measure, cannot only be so determined. Attempting to claim this has led to such a “self-sublating” and the introduction of a new form of determination.

 
    